thread-3: Start crawling
WebPage index: 00000
Encyclopedia
An encyclopedia or encyclopaedia (also spelled encyclopædia , see spelling differences ) [1] is a type of reference work or compendium holding a comprehensive summary of information from either all branches of knowledge or a particular branch of knowledge. [2] Encyclopedias are divided into articles or entries, which are usually arranged alphabetically by article name. [3] Encyclopedia entries are longer and more detailed than those in most dictionaries . [3] Generally speaking, unlike dictionary entries which focus on linguistic information about words , encyclopedia articles focus on factual information concerning the subject for which the article is named. [4] [5] [6] [7]
Encyclopedias have existed for around 2,000 years; the oldest still in existence, Naturalis Historia , was written starting in ca. AD 77 by Pliny the Elder and was not fully revised at the time of his death in AD 79. The modern encyclopedia evolved out of dictionaries around the 17th century. Historically, some encyclopedias were contained in one volume , whereas others, such as the Encyclopædia Britannica , the Enciclopedia Italiana (62 volumes, 56,000 pages) or the world's largest, Enciclopedia universal ilustrada europeo-americana (118 volumes, 105,000 pages), became huge multi-volume works. Some modern encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia , are often electronic and freely available.

Etymology
The word encyclopedia comes from the Koine Greek ἐγκύκλιος παιδεία , [8] transliterated enkyklios paideia , meaning "general education" from enkyklios (ἐγκύκλιος), meaning "circular, recurrent, required regularly, general" [9] and paideia (παιδεία), meaning "education, rearing of a child"; [10] it was reduced to a single word due to an error [11] by copyists of Latin manuscripts. Together, the phrase literally translates as "complete instruction" or "complete knowledge".
Copyists of Latin manuscripts took this phrase to be a single Greek word, enkyklopaidia , with the same meaning, and this spurious Greek word became the New Latin word "encyclopaedia", which in turn came into English. Though the notion of a compendium of knowledge dates back thousands of years, the term was first used in the title of a book in 1517 by Johannes Aventinus : Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio , and in 1538 by Joachimus Fortius Ringelbergius , Lucubrationes vel potius absolutissima kyklopaideia ( Basel , 1538).
The word encyclopaedia was first used as a noun in the title of his book by the Croatian encyclopedist Pavao Skalić in his Encyclopaedia seu orbis disciplinarum tam sacrarum quam prophanarum epistemon (Encyclopaedia, or Knowledge of the World of Disciplines, Basel, 1559). One of the oldest vernacular uses was by François Rabelais in his Pantagruel in 1532. [13] [14] Several encyclopedias have names that include the suffix -p(a)edia , e.g., Banglapedia (on matters relevant for Bengal).
In British usage, the spellings encyclopedia and encyclopaedia are both current. [15] In American usage, only the former is commonly used. [16] The spelling encyclopædia —with the æ ligature —was frequently used in the 19th century and is increasingly rare, although it is retained in product titles such as Encyclopædia Britannica and others. The Oxford English Dictionary (1989) records encyclopædia and encyclopaedia as equal alternatives (in that order), and notes the æ would be obsolete except that it is preserved in works that have Latin titles. Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1997–2002) features encyclopedia as the main headword and encyclopaedia as a minor variant. In addition, cyclopedia and cyclopaedia are now rarely used shortened forms of the word originating in the 17th century.

Characteristics
The modern encyclopedia was developed from the dictionary in the 18th century. Historically, both encyclopedias and dictionaries have been researched and written by well-educated, well-informed content experts , but they are significantly different in structure. A dictionary is a linguistic work which primarily focuses on alphabetical listing of words and their definitions . Synonymous words and those related by the subject matter are to be found scattered around the dictionary, giving no obvious place for in-depth treatment. Thus, a dictionary typically provides limited information , analysis or background for the word defined. While it may offer a definition, it may leave the reader lacking in understanding the meaning, significance or limitations of a term , and how the term relates to a broader field of knowledge. An encyclopedia is, theoretically, not written in order to convince, although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader of its own veracity.
To address those needs, an encyclopedia article is typically not limited to simple definitions, and is not limited to defining an individual word, but provides a more extensive meaning for a subject or discipline . In addition to defining and listing synonymous terms for the topic, the article is able to treat the topic's more extensive meaning in more depth and convey the most relevant accumulated knowledge on that subject. An encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations , as well as bibliography and statistics .
Four major elements define an encyclopedia: its subject matter, its scope, its method of organization, and its method of production:
Some works entitled "dictionaries" are actually similar to encyclopedias, especially those concerned with a particular field (such as the Dictionary of the Middle Ages , the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships , and Black's Law Dictionary ). The Macquarie Dictionary , Australia's national dictionary, became an encyclopedic dictionary after its first edition in recognition of the use of proper nouns in common communication, and the words derived from such proper nouns.
There are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries. Most noticeably, encyclopedia articles are longer, fuller and more thorough than entries in most general-purpose dictionaries. [3] [17] There are differences in content as well. Generally speaking, dictionaries provide linguistic information about words themselves, while encyclopedias focus more on the thing for which those words stand. [4] [5] [6] [7] Thus, while dictionary entries are inextricably fixed to the word described, encyclopedia articles can be given a different entry name. As such, dictionary entries are not fully translatable into other languages, but encyclopedia articles can be. [4]
In practice, however, the distinction is not concrete, as there is no clear-cut difference between factual, "encyclopedic" information and linguistic information such as appears in dictionaries. [6] [17] [18] Thus encyclopedias may contain material that is also found in dictionaries, and vice versa. [18] In particular, dictionary entries often contain factual information about the thing named by the word. [17] [18]

History
Encyclopedias have progressed from written form in antiquity, to print in modern times. Today they can also be distributed and displayed electronically.

Ancient times
One of the earliest encyclopedic works to have survived to modern times is the Naturalis Historia of Pliny the Elder , a Roman statesman living in the first century AD. He compiled a work of 37 chapters covering natural history, architecture, medicine, geography, geology, and other aspects of the world around him. He stated in the preface that he had compiled 20,000 facts from 2000 works by over 200 authors, and added many others from his own experience. The work was published around AD 77–79, although Pliny probably never finished editing the work before his death in the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79. [19]

Middle Ages
Isidore of Seville , one of the greatest scholars of the early Middle Ages, is widely recognized for writing the first encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, the Etymologiae ( The Etymologies ) or Origines (around 630), in which he compiled a sizable portion of the learning available at his time, both ancient and contemporary. The work has 448 chapters in 20 volumes, and is valuable because of the quotes and fragments of texts by other authors that would have been lost had he not collected them.
The most popular encyclopedia of the Carolingian Age was the De universo or De rerum naturis by Rabanus Maurus , written about 830; it was based on Etymologiae . [ citation needed ]
The encyclopedia of Suda , a massive 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, had 30 000 entries, many drawing from ancient sources that have since been lost, and often derived from medieval Christian compilers. The text was arranged alphabetically with some slight deviations from common vowel order and place in the Greek alphabet.
The early Muslim compilations of knowledge in the Middle Ages included many comprehensive works. Around year 960, the Brethren of Purity of Basra were engaged in their Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity . [20] Notable works include Abu Bakr al-Razi 's encyclopedia of science, the Mutazilite Al-Kindi 's prolific output of 270 books, and Ibn Sina 's medical encyclopedia, which was a standard reference work for centuries. Also notable are works of universal history (or sociology) from Asharites , al-Tabri , al-Masudi , Tabari 's History of the Prophets and Kings , Ibn Rustah , al-Athir , and Ibn Khaldun , whose Muqadimmah contains cautions regarding trust in written records that remain wholly applicable today.
The enormous encyclopedic work in China of the Four Great Books of Song , compiled by the 11th century AD during the early Song dynasty (960–1279), was a massive literary undertaking for the time. The last encyclopedia of the four, the Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau , amounted to 9.4 million Chinese characters in 1000 written volumes.
In late medieval Europe, several authors had the ambition of compiling the sum of human knowledge in a certain field or overall, for example Bartholomew of England , Vincent of Beauvais , Radulfus Ardens , Sydrac , Brunetto Latini , Giovanni da Sangiminiano, Pierre Bersuire . Some were women, like Hildegard of Bingen and Herrad of Landsberg . The most successful of those publications were the Speculum maius (Great Mirror) of Vincent of Beauvais and the De proprietatibus rerum (On the Properties of Things) by Bartholomew of England . The latter was translated (or adapted) into French, Provençal, Italian, English, Flemish, Anglo-Norman, Spanish, and German during the Middle Ages. Both were written in the middle of the 13th century. No medieval encyclopedia bore the title Encyclopaedia – they were often called On nature (De natura, De naturis rerum) , Mirror (Speculum maius, Speculum universale) , Treasure (Trésor) . [21]

Renaissance
Medieval encyclopedias were all hand-copied and thus available mostly to wealthy patrons or monastic men of learning; they were expensive, and usually written for those extending knowledge rather than those using it. [22]
During the Renaissance , the creation of printing allowed a wider diffusion of encyclopedias and every scholar could have his or her own copy. The De expetendis et fugiendis rebus by Giorgio Valla was posthumously printed in 1501 by Aldo Manuzio in Venice . This work followed the traditional scheme of liberal arts. However, Valla added the translation of ancient Greek works on mathematics (firstly by Archimedes ), newly discovered and translated. The Margarita Philosophica by Gregor Reisch , printed in 1503, was a complete encyclopedia explaining the seven liberal arts .
The term encyclopaedia was coined by 16th-century humanists who misread copies of their texts of Pliny and Quintilian , and combined the two Greek words " enkyklios paideia " into one word, έγκυκλοπαιδεία. [23] The phrase enkyklios paideia (ἐγκύκλιος παιδεία) was used by Plutarch and the Latin word Encyclopedia came from him.
The first work titled in this way was the Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio written by Johannes Aventinus in 1517. [ citation needed ]
The English physician and philosopher, Sir Thomas Browne used the word 'encyclopaedia' in 1646 in the preface to the reader to define his Pseudodoxia Epidemica , a major work of the 17th-century scientific revolution. Browne structured his encyclopaedia upon the time-honoured scheme of the Renaissance, the so-called 'scale of creation' which ascends through the mineral, vegetable, animal, human, planetary, and cosmological worlds. Pseudodoxia Epidemica was a European best-seller, translated into French, Dutch, and German as well as Latin it went through no fewer than five editions, each revised and augmented, the last edition appearing in 1672.
Financial, commercial, legal, and intellectual factors changed the size of encyclopedias. During the Renaissance , middle classes had more time to read and encyclopedias helped them to learn more. Publishers wanted to increase their output so some countries like Germany started selling books missing alphabetical sections, to publish faster. Also, publishers could not afford all the resources by themselves, so multiple publishers would come together with their resources to create better encyclopedias. When publishing at the same rate became financially impossible, they turned to subscriptions and serial publications. This was risky for publishers because they had to find people that would pay all upfront or make payments. When this worked, capital would rise and there would be a steady income for encyclopedias. Later, rivalry grew, causing copyright to occur due to weak underdeveloped laws. Some publishers would copy another publisher’s work to produce an encyclopedia faster and cheaper so consumers did not have to pay a lot and they would sell more. Encyclopedias made it to where middle-class citizens could basically have a small library in their own house. Europeans were becoming more curious about their society around them causing them to revolt against their government. [24]

18th–19th centuries
The beginnings of the modern idea of the general-purpose, widely distributed printed encyclopedia precede the 18th century encyclopedists. However, Chambers ' Cyclopaedia, or Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1728), and the Encyclopédie of Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1751 onwards), as well as Encyclopædia Britannica and the Conversations-Lexikon , were the first to realize the form we would recognize today, with a comprehensive scope of topics, discussed in depth and organized in an accessible, systematic method. Chambers, in 1728, followed the earlier lead of John Harris's Lexicon Technicum of 1704 and later editions (see also below); this work was by its title and content "A Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Explaining not only the Terms of Art, but the Arts Themselves".
During the 19th and early 20th century, many smaller or less developed languages [ which? ] saw their first encyclopedias, using French, German, and English role models. While encyclopedias in larger languages, having large markets that could support a large editorial staff, churned out new 20-volume works in a few years and new editions with brief intervals, such publication plans often spanned a decade or more in smaller languages. [ citation needed ]

20th century
Popular and affordable encyclopedias such as Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopaedia and the Children's Encyclopaedia appeared in the early 1920s.
In the United States, the 1950s and 1960s saw the introduction of several large popular encyclopedias, often sold on installment plans. The best known of these were World Book and Funk and Wagnalls .
The second half of the 20th century also saw the proliferation of specialized encyclopedias that compiled topics in specific fields. This trend has continued. Encyclopedias of at least one volume in size now exist for most if not all academic disciplines , including such narrow topics such as bioethics .
By the late 20th century, encyclopedias were being published on CD-ROMs for use with personal computers. Microsoft 's Encarta , launched in 1993, was a landmark example as it had no printed equivalent. Articles were supplemented with both video and audio files as well as numerous high-quality images. After sixteen years, Microsoft discontinued the Encarta line of products in 2009. [25]

21st century
In 2001, Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger launched Wikipedia , a collaboratively edited, multilingual, open-source , free Internet encyclopedia supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation . As of 4 May 2017, there are 5,398,648 articles in the English Wikipedia. There are 287 different editions of Wikipedia. As of February 2014, it had 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors each month. [26] Wikipedia has more than 25 million accounts, out of which there were over 118,000 active editors globally, as of August 2015. Wikipedia's accuracy was found by a Nature study to be close to that of Encyclopædia Britannica , [27] with Wikipedia being much larger.
However, critics argue Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias , [28] [29] and its group dynamics hinder its goals. [ clarification needed ] Many academics, historians, teachers, and journalists reject Wikipedia as a reliable source of information, primarily for being a mixture of truths, half truths, and some falsehoods, and that as a resource about many controversial topics, is notoriously subject to manipulation and spin. [ citation needed ]
While Wikipedia is by far the largest web-based encyclopedia, it is not the only one in existence. There are several much smaller, usually more specialized, encyclopedias on various themes, sometimes dedicated to a specific geographic region or time period. [30]

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00001
Wolfenstein 3D
Wolfenstein 3D is a first-person shooter video game developed by id Software and published by Apogee Software and FormGen . Originally released on May 5, 1992, for MS-DOS , it was inspired by the 1981 Muse Software video game Castle Wolfenstein . In Wolfenstein 3D , the player assumes the role of Allied spy William "B.J." Blazkowicz during World War II as he escapes from the Nazi German prison Castle Wolfenstein and carries out a series of crucial missions against the Nazis. The player traverses through each of the game's levels to find an elevator to the next level or kill a final boss , fighting Nazi soldiers, dogs, and other enemies with knives, pistols, and other guns.
Wolfenstein 3D was the second major release by id Software, after the Commander Keen series of episodes. In mid-1991, programmer John Carmack experimented with making a fast 3D game engine by restricting the gameplay and viewpoint to a single plane , producing Hovertank 3D and Catacomb 3-D as prototypes. After a design session prompted the company to shift from the family-friendly Keen to a more violent theme, programmer John Romero suggested remaking the 1981 stealth shooter Castle Wolfenstein as a fast-paced action game. He and designer Tom Hall designed the game, built on Carmack's engine, to be fast and violent, unlike other computer games on the market at the time. Wolfenstein 3D features artwork by Adrian Carmack and sound effects and music by Bobby Prince . The game was released through Apogee in two sets of three episodes under the shareware model, in which the first episode is released for free to drive interest in paying for the rest. An additional episode, Spear of Destiny , was released as a stand-alone retail title through FormGen.
Wolfenstein 3D was a critical and commercial success, garnering numerous awards and selling over 200,000 copies by the end of 1993. It is widely regarded as having helped popularize the first-person shooter genre and establishing the standard of fast-paced action and technical prowess for many subsequent games in the genre, as well as showcasing the viability of the shareware publishing model at the time. FormGen developed an additional two episodes for the game, while Apogee released a pack of over 800 fan-created levels. Id Software never returned to the series, but did license the engine to numerous other titles before releasing the source code for free in 1995, and multiple other games in the Wolfenstein series have been developed by other companies since 2001.

Gameplay
Wolfenstein 3D is a first-person shooter presented with rudimentary 3D graphics . [1] The game is broken up into levels , each of which is a flat plane divided into areas and rooms by a grid-based pattern of walls and doors, all of equal height. [1] Each level is themed after Nazi bunkers and buildings. To finish a level, the player must traverse through the area to reach an elevator. [2] Groups of levels, ten in the original episodes, are grouped together into named episodes, with the final level focusing on a boss fight with a particularly difficult enemy. [3] While traversing the levels, the player must fight Nazi guards and soldiers, dogs, and other enemies while managing supplies of ammunition and health. The player can find weapons and ammunition placed in the levels or can collect them from dead enemies; weapons include a knife, a pistol, a submachine gun, and a rapid-fire chain gun . [2] While the levels are presented in a 3D perspective, the enemies and objects are instead 2D sprites presented from several set viewing angles, a technique sometimes referred to as 2.5D graphics. [4]
The player's health is represented by a percentage starting at 100, which is diminished when they are shot or attacked by enemies. [5] If the player's health falls to zero, they lose one life and start the level over with a knife, a pistol, and eight bullets. [2] The player begins each episode with three lives and can gain more by finding extra-life tokens or by earning enough points. Points are scored by killing enemies or collecting treasures scattered throughout the levels. [5] Points can also be scored by killing all enemies in a level, collecting all treasure, finding all secret areas, or completing a level under a par time; the player's completion ratio and speed is displayed when a level is completed. Secret areas containing treasure, health refills, or ammunition can be found in hidden rooms revealed by activating certain wall tiles that slide back when triggered. [3] The original version of the game allows the player to save their progress at any point, though in many of its ports the player can only save between levels. [2] [3]

Plot
Wolfenstein 3D is divided into two sets of three episodes: "Escape from Castle Wolfenstein", "Operation: Eisenfaust", and "Die, Führer, Die!" serve as the primary trilogy, with a second trilogy titled The Nocturnal Missions including "A Dark Secret", "Trail of the Madman", and "Confrontation". The protagonist is William "B.J." Blazkowicz , an American spy of Polish descent, and the game follows his efforts to destroy the Nazi regime. In "Escape", Blazkowicz has been captured while trying to find the plans for Operation Eisenfaust (Iron Fist) and imprisoned in Castle Wolfenstein, from which he must escape. "Operation: Eisenfaust" follows his discovery and thwarting of the Nazi plan to create an army of undead mutants in Castle Hollehammer, while in "Die, Führer, Die!" he infiltrates a bunker under the Reichstag , culminating in a battle with Adolf Hitler in a robotic suit equipped with four chain guns .
The Nocturnal Missions form a prequel storyline dealing with German plans for chemical warfare. "A Dark Secret" deals with the initial pursuit through a weapons research facility of the scientist responsible for developing the weaponry. "Trail of the Madman" takes place in Castle Erlangen , where Blazkowicz's goal is to find the maps and plans for the chemical war. The story ends in "Confrontation", which is set in Castle Offenbach as he confronts the Nazi general behind the chemical warfare initiative.
An additional episode entitled Spear of Destiny was released as a retail game by FormGen . It follows Blazkowicz on a different prequel mission trying to recapture the Spear of Destiny from the Nazis after it was stolen from Versailles . FormGen later developed two sequel episodes, "Return to Danger" and "Ultimate Challenge", each of which feature Blazkowicz as he fights through another Nazi base to recover the Spear of Destiny after it has been stolen again as part of a plot to build a nuclear weapon or summon demons.

Development
In October–December 1990, a team of employees from programming studio Softdisk calling themselves Ideas from the Deep developed the three-part video game Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons , the first game in the Commander Keen series. The group, who worked at Softdisk in Shreveport, Louisiana , developing games for the Gamer's Edge magazine, was composed of programmers John Romero and John Carmack , designer Tom Hall , artist Adrian Carmack , and manager Jay Wilbur. After the release of the game in December through shareware publisher Apogee Software , the team planned to quit Softdisk and start their own company. When their boss, Softdisk owner Al Vekovius, confronted them on both their plans and their use of company resources to develop the game—the team had created it on their work computers, both in the office after hours and by taking the computers to John Carmack's house on the weekends—the team made no secret of their intentions. After a few weeks of negotiation, the team agreed to produce a series of games for Gamer's Edge , one every two months. [6]
Ideas from the Deep, now formally established as id Software , used some of these to prototype ideas for their own games. [7] Adrian Carmack used them to push his preferred, dark art style, while John Carmack began to experiment with 3D computer graphics , which until then was largely the purview of flight simulation games such as Wing Commander (1990). Carmack found that this was largely due to the limitations of personal computers of the time, which had difficulty displaying a fast action game in 3D due to the number of surfaces it needed to calculate. During 1991, he experimented with limiting the possible surfaces the computer needed to display, creating game levels with walls designed only on a flat grid rather than with arbitrary shapes or angles. He also took the unusual approach of creating the displayed graphics through ray casting , in which only the surfaces visible to the player were calculated rather than the entire area surrounding the player. After six weeks of development, Carmack had created a rudimentary 3D game engine that used animated 2D sprites for enemies. Id Software then used the engine for the April 1991 Softdisk game Hovertank 3D , in which the player drives a tank through a plane of colored walls and shoots nuclear monsters. [1] [6] In the fall of 1991, after the team—sans Wilbur—had relocated to Madison, Wisconsin , and he had largely finished the engine work for Commander Keen in Goodbye, Galaxy , Carmack learned about Ultima Underworld: The Stygian Abyss , a role-playing game in development by Blue Sky Productions . [8] Ultima Underworld was planned to display texture-mapped 3D graphics without Hovertank ' s restrictions of flat walls and simple lighting. [8] [9] [10] Deciding that he could add texture mapping without sacrificing the engine's speed or greatly increasing the system requirements as Underworld was doing, Carmack enhanced the engine over six weeks from Hovertank 3D for another Softdisk game, the November 1991 Catacomb 3-D . [1] [8] Upon seeing it, Scott Miller of Apogee began to push the team to make a 3D shareware action game. [8]
In November 1991, with the second Commander Keen trilogy of episodes nearing completion and their contractual obligations to Softdisk almost finished, id Software sat down to plan out their next major game. Designer Tom Hall, who initially wanted to do a third Keen trilogy, recognized that Carmack's programming focus had shifted from the 2D side-scrolling platform game series to 3D action games. After an initial proposal by Hall of a sci-fi project, "It's Green and Pissed", Romero suggested a 3D remake of the 1981 Castle Wolfenstein . The team was interested in the idea, as Romero, Hall, and John Carmack all had fond memories of the original title and felt the maze-like shooter gameplay fit well with Carmack's 3D game engine, while Adrian Carmack was interested in moving away from the child-friendly art style of Keen into something more violent. Encouraged by the reception to his idea, Romero expounded on it by proposing a "loud" and "cool" fast action game where the player could shoot soldiers before dragging and looting their bodies. The core of the gameplay would be fast and simple, for Romero believed that due to the novelty of a 3D game and control scheme, players would not be receptive to more complicated, slow gameplay. [11] He felt the game would occupy a unique place in the industry, which was then dominated by slower simulation and strategy games. Adrian and John Carmack were excited by the prospect, while Hall felt that it was enjoyable enough, and that since he was the company's designer that they could return to his ideas at a later date. [4]
Initially the team believed that they would be unable to use the Wolfenstein name due to trademark issues, and came up with multiple possible titles, only to discover that the original developer, Muse Software , had gone out of business several years earlier and let the trademark lapse, leaving them the option to use the name Wolfenstein 3D . The game concept met with immediate approval from Scott Miller of Apogee, who considered id Software his star developer, and he paid id a US$100,000 advance on the project. Mark Rein, who had been brought on a few months prior as id's probationary president, also sold the idea of doing a retail Wolfenstein project to FormGen , which had published id's December 1991 Commander Keen in Aliens Ate My Babysitter , overcoming the publisher's concerns over Wolfenstein ' s proposed content. This put id in the unique position of selling simultaneously to the shareware and retail markets. [12]
Romero and Hall designed the gameplay and aesthetics; Romero wanted the goal to be "to mow down Nazis", with the suspense of storming a Nazi bunker full of SS soldiers and Hitler himself, as well as dogs, blood "like you never see in games", and straightforward, lethal weapons. Hall designed the levels while also adding collectible objects in the form of treasure and food for health items. [12] Carmack added a few features to the Wolfenstein 3D engine from Catacomb 3-D , including support for doors and decorative non-wall objects, but primarily focused on making the game run smoother and faster with higher-resolution graphics. [1] [12] Romero in turn worked on building a game with the engine, removing elements of the initial design, like looting enemy bodies, that he felt interrupted the flow of fast gameplay. [12] The level design, by Romero and Hall, due to the grid-based level design, took some inspiration from Pac-Man , and paid homage with a hidden Pac-Man level. [13] The team ensured that the presentation of the game created the atmosphere that they wanted, adding violent animations by Adrian Carmack for enemies being shot and music and sound effects by Keen composer Bobby Prince to make the guns sound exciting. [12]
As development continued, id Software hired their former Softdisk liaison Kevin Cloud as an assistant artist, and moved the company out to Mesquite, Texas , near where Apogee was located. [12] Scott Miller of Apogee was pleased to have his star developers nearby, and agreed to not only increase their royalty rate to 50 percent, but have Apogee create their next game for Softdisk, ScubaVenture , so that id could focus on Wolfenstein . The game was intended to be released using Apogee's shareware model of splitting it into three episodes and releasing the first for free, with ten levels per episode. [14] Upon finding out that the team was able to create a level in a single day, using a modified version of the Commander Keen 2D map editor, Miller convinced them to instead develop six episodes, which could be sold in different sized packs. [1] [14] Around the same time, the team changed members and structure: id fired probationary president Mark Rein and brought back Jay Wilbur, who had stayed in Shreveport, to be both their CEO and business team; Bobby Prince moved into the office temporarily to record sound effects, while Adrian Carmack moved out of the office to get away from the noise. [14]
As the game neared completion, FormGen contacted id with concerns over its violence and shock content. In response, id increased these aspects; Adrian Carmack added skeletons, corpses, and bloody wall details, and Hall and Romero added screams and cries in German, along with a Death Cam that would show a replay of the death of the final boss of an episode. The team also added " Horst-Wessel-Lied ", the anthem of the Nazi Party , to the opening screen. John Carmack, meanwhile, added in walls that moved when triggered to hide secret areas, a feature that Hall had been pushing for months but which Carmack had objected to for technical reasons. Hall also added in cheat codes, and wrote a back story for the game. In the early morning of May 5, 1992, the first episode of the shareware game was completed and uploaded by Apogee and id to bulletin board systems . The other episodes were completed a few weeks later. The total development time had been around half a year, with a cost of around US$25,000 to cover the team's rent and US$750 per month salaries. [15]

Release
The first episode was released as shareware for free distribution by Apogee and the whole original trilogy of episodes made available for purchase on May 5 as Wolfenstein 3D , though the purchased episodes were not actually shipped to customers until a few weeks later. The second trilogy that Miller had convinced id to create was released soon after as an add-on pack titled The Nocturnal Missions . [15] Players were able to buy each trilogy separately or as a single game. [16] In 1993 Apogee also published the Wolfenstein 3D Super Upgrades pack, which included 815 fan-made levels, along with a map editor and a random level generator. [17] A retail Wolfenstein episode double the length of the Apogee episodes, Spear of Destiny , was released through FormGen on September 18, 1992. FormGen later published two mission packs titled "Return to Danger" and "Ultimate Challenge", each the same length as Spear of Destiny , in May 1994, and later that year published Spear of Destiny and the two mission packs together as the Spear of Destiny Super CD Package . Id released the original six Apogee episodes as a retail title through GT Software in 1993 and produced a collection of both the Apogee and FormGen episodes released through Activision in 1998. [18]
There were two intended promotions associated with the original Apogee release, both of which were cancelled. A pushable wall maze led to a sign reading "Call Apogee and say Aardwolf "; it was intended that the first person to find the sign and carry out its instructions would win a prize, but the quick creation of level editors and cheat programs for the game soon after release led id and Apogee to give up on the idea. Additionally, after completing an episode the player is given a three-letter code in addition to their total score and time. This code was intended to be a verification code as part of a high-score contest, but the sudden prevalence of editor programs resulted in the cancellation of the contest without ever being formally announced. [19]
Since its initial release, Wolfenstein 3D has been ported to numerous other platforms. These include the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (1994), Mac OS (1994), the Atari Jaguar (1994), Acorn Archimedes (1994), 3DO (1995), Apple IIGS (1998), and the PC-98 (1998). [20] [21] [22] [23] The Super NES and Jaguar ports were developed by id, while the rest were produced by other companies. [24] Later releases include the Game Boy Advance (2002), Xbox Live Arcade , PlayStation Network , and an iOS version programmed by Carmack himself (2009). [1] [20] [25] [26] [27] These ports' sound, graphics, and levels sometimes differ from the original—the Super NES version notably replaced the blood with sweat, dogs with rats, and removed all Nazi references, although the core gameplay and aesthetic are retained. Many of the ports include only the Apogee episodes, but the iOS port includes Spear of Destiny , and a 2007 Steam release for PC, OS X, and Linux includes all of the FormGen episodes. [20] [28] Bethesda Softworks , whose parent company bought id Software in 2009, celebrated the 20th anniversary of Wolfenstein 3D ' s release by producing a free-to-play browser-based version of the game in 2012. [29]

Reception
Id had no clear expectations for Wolfenstein ' s commercial reception, but hoped that it would make around US$60,000 in its first month; the first royalty check from Apogee was instead for US$100,000. [15] PC Zone quoted a shareware distributor as saying Wolfenstein 3D was the top shareware seller of 1992. [30] By the end of 1993, sales of the Apogee episodes of Wolfenstein 3D as well as Spear of Destiny had reached over 100,000 units each, with the Apogee game still selling strongly by the end of the year as its reach spread without newer retail titles to compete with it for shelf space. [24] Over 20 percent of its sales were from outside of the US, despite the lack of any marketing or non-English description and despite the game being banned from sale in Germany due to its inclusion of Nazi symbols. [15] [24] The Apogee episodes' sales vastly exceeded the shareware game sales record set by the developer's earlier Commander Keen series and provided id with a much higher profit margin than the sales of its retail counterpart. [24]
Wolfenstein 3D won the 1993 "Best Action/Arcade Game" award at the Shareware Industry Awards [31] and a Codie award from the Software Publishing Association for Best Action/Arcade Game. It was the first shareware title to win a Codie, and id (with six employees) became the smallest company to ever receive the award. [32] Wolfenstein 3D was noted as one of the top games of the year at the 1993 Game Developers Conference , [33] was named by VideoGames & Computer Entertainment as the Best Action Game and Most Innovative Game of 1992 and by Compute! as the Best Arcade/Action Game, [17] and Computer Gaming World named it the magazine's Action Game of the Year in 1993. [34]
Wolfenstein 3D was well received by reviewers upon its release. Chris Lombardi of Computer Gaming World praised the "sparse [but] gorgeous", "frighteningly realistic", and "extremely violent" graphics, as well as the "immersive" sound and music. Noting the violence, he warned "those sensitive to such things to stay home". Lombardi concluded that Wolfenstein 3D , alongside Ultima Underworld released two months prior, was "the first game technologically capable of creating a sufficient element of disbelief–suspension to emotionally immerse the player in a threatening environment", stating that they knew of no other game that could "evoke such intense psychological responses from its players". [35] Wolfenstein twice received 5 out of 5 stars in Dragon in 1993; Hartley, Patricia, and Kirk Lesser termed it "definitely one of the best arcade games ever created for PC", highly praised the graphics and sound, and said that the "fast-paced action" could keep players enthralled for weeks if they were not concerned about the violence. [5] Sandy Petersen , in the first "Eye of the Monitor" column, claimed that "there is nothing else quite like Wolfenstein " and that it had "evolved almost beyond recognition" from the original 1981 game. He enthusiastically praised the speed and gameplay, calling it "a fun game with lots of action" and "a fun, fairly mindless romp", though he did note that at higher difficulty settings or later levels it became extremely hard. [2] The Spear of Destiny retail episode was also rated highly by Computer Gaming World ' s Bryan A. Walker, who praised the added enemy types, though he noted that it was essentially the same game as the shareware episodes. [36]
The early ports of the game also received high reviews, though their sales have been described as "dismal". [37] The four reviewers of Electronic Gaming Monthly called the Super NES version a good conversion that retained the good music, huge levels, and overall fun of the original game and dismissed the censoring in the version as inconsequential. [38] The magazine rated the Jaguar version similarly, commenting that the graphics and audio were superior to other versions of the game, but criticizing the faster movement of the player character as making it less fun to play. [39] A GamePro review of the Jaguar port was highly complimentary, saying Wolfenstein 3D "set a new standard for PC gaming" and that the Jaguar version was the best to date, and better than the original due to its increased graphics and sound capabilities. [40] Major Mike of GamePro commended the 3DO version's complete absence of pixelation , fast scaling, "rousing" music, and high quality sound effects, but criticized the controls as overly sensitive. He concluded that the game, then over three years old, "still packs a punch as a first-person shooter". [41] Maximum , on the other hand, while stating that the 3DO port was better than the original and as good as the Jaguar version, felt that it was so aged compared to recent releases like Hexen: Beyond Heretic and the PlayStation version of Doom that a new port was pointless, with the game now "somewhat tiresome and very, very repetitive". [42] A reviewer for Next Generation asserted that Wolfenstein 3D was "still as addictive as it ever was" but essentially agreed with Maximum , contending that anyone interested in first-person shooters would have either already played it on another platform or "moved on" to more advanced games in the genre. [43] A more modern review by Daemon Hatfield of IGN gave the PlayStation Network release of the game a warm reception, saying that while it was "dated and flawed", it was "required playing for any first-person shooter fan". [44]

Legacy
Wolfenstein 3D has been called the "grandfather of 3D shooters", [45] [46] specifically first-person shooters, because it established the fast-paced action and technical prowess commonly expected in the genre and greatly increased the genre's popularity. [45] [47] [48] [49] Although some prior computer shooting-based games existed, they were generally scrolling shooters , while Wolfenstein 3D helped move the market towards first-person shooters. [46] It has also been attributed with confirming shareware distribution as a serious and profitable business strategy at the time; [24] [45] VideoGames & Computer Entertainment claimed in September 1992 that the game "justified the existence of shareware", and in July 1993 Computer Gaming World claimed that it "almost single-handedly" demonstrated the viability of shareware as a method of publishing, leading to a wave of other shareware first-person shooters. [33] [50] [51]
During development, id approached Sierra Entertainment , then one of the biggest companies in the industry and employer of several of their idols, with the goal of seeing if they could make a deal with the company. After viewing Commander Keen and an early version of Wolfenstein 3D , CEO Ken Williams offered to buy id Software for US$2.5 million and turn it into an in-house development studio. The team was excited by the deal, but had felt there was a large culture clash between the two companies during their visit to Sierra and were hesitant to accept; Romero proposed asking for US$100,000 in cash up front as part of the deal rather than solely accepting payment in Sierra stock as a measure of Williams's seriousness. Williams refused, which id interpreted to mean that Williams did not truly recognize the potential of Wolfenstein 3D and the company, and the deal fell through, causing id to decide to remain an independent company for the foreseeable future. [12] By the end of 1993 just before the release of their next game, Doom , the success of Wolfenstein 3D led id to receive multiple calls every month from investment companies looking to make id a publicly-traded company, which were all turned down. [24]
After the game's release, id Software licensed the engine to other developers, like the Commander Keen engine before it, as part of a series of engine licensing deals that id has made throughout its history; games using the Wolfenstein 3D engine or derivatives of it include Blake Stone , the Capstone Software games Corridor 7 and Operation Body Count , as well as Super 3D Noah's Ark . [52] [53] Apogee intended to produce an expansion pack in 1993 titled Rise of the Triad: Wolfenstein 3D Part II , designed by Tom Hall using the Wolfenstein 3D engine, but during development the game was changed into a stand-alone title with an enhanced engine, Rise of the Triad . [54] Additionally, Softdisk produced Catacomb Abyss using the prototype Wolfenstein 3D engine from Catacomb 3-D as part of the Catacomb Adventure Series trilogy of sequels. [55] Although Wolfenstein 3D was not designed to be editable or modified, players developed character and level editors to create original alterations to the game's content. [1] [15] John Carmack and Romero, who had played numerous mods of other games, were delighted, and overrode any concerns about copyright issues by the others. [15] The modding efforts of Wolfenstein players led id Software to explicitly design later titles like Doom and Quake to be easily modifiable by players, even including the map editing tools id Software used with the games. [1] [56] [57] The source code for the original Wolfenstein 3D engine was released by id in 1995; when making the 2009 iOS port, Carmack used some of the enhancements to the engine made by fans after its release. [1] [18] The game's technical achievements also lead to numerous imitators such as Ken's Labyrinth , Nitemare 3D , The Terminator: Rampage , Terminal Terror and The Fortress of Dr. Radiaki , among others. [58]
Although id Software did not develop another Wolfenstein game, as their development focus shifted to Doom shortly after release, [15] and has never returned to the series, multiple Wolfenstein titles have been produced by other companies, sometimes using game engines developed by id. The first of these newer Wolfenstein games was Return to Castle Wolfenstein in 2001, a reboot of the series, and the latest is the 2015 Wolfenstein: The Old Blood . [59] [60] One of these games, Wolfenstein: The New Order (2014), featured an easter egg where players could play through the first level of Wolfenstein 3D . [61]
WebPage index: 00002
id Software
id Software LLC ( / ɪ d / ; see Company name ) is an American video game developer headquartered in Dallas , Texas . The company was founded on February 1, 1991, by four members of the computer company Softdisk , programmers John Carmack and John Romero , game designer Tom Hall , and artist Adrian Carmack (no relation to John Carmack). Business manager Jay Wilbur was also involved. [2]
id Software made important technological developments in video game technologies for the PC (running MS-DOS and Windows ), including work done for the Wolfenstein , Doom , and Quake franchises. id's work was particularly important in 3D computer graphics technology and in game engines that are heavily used throughout the video game industry .
The company was also heavily involved in the creation of the first-person shooter genre. Wolfenstein 3D is often considered as the first true FPS, Doom was a game that popularized the genre and PC gaming in general, and Quake was id's first true 3D first-person shooter.
On June 24, 2009, ZeniMax Media acquired the company. In 2015, they opened a second studio in Frankfurt , Germany . [3]

History
The founders of id Software met in the offices of Softdisk developing multiple games for Softdisk's monthly publishing. These included Dangerous Dave and other titles. In September 1990, John Carmack developed an efficient way that would perform rapid side-scrolling graphics on the PC . Upon making this breakthrough, Carmack and Hall stayed up late into the night making a replica of the first level of the popular 1988 NES game Super Mario Bros. 3 , inserting stock graphics of Romero's Dangerous Dave character in lieu of Mario. When Romero saw the demo , entitled "Dangerous Dave in Copyright Infringement", he realized that Carmack's breakthrough could have potential. The team that would later form id Software immediately began moonlighting, going so far as to "borrow" company computers that were not being used over the weekends and at nights while they designed their own remake of Super Mario Bros. 3 .
Despite their work, Nintendo turned them down, saying they had no interest in expanding to the PC market, and that Mario games were to remain exclusive to Nintendo consoles. Around this time, Scott Miller of Apogee Software learned of the group and their exceptional talent, having played one of John Romero's Softdisk games, Dangerous Dave , and contacted Romero under the guise of multiple fan letters that Romero came to realize all originated from the same address. [4] [5] When he confronted Miller, Miller explained that the deception was necessary since companies at that time were very protective of their talent and it was the only way he could get Romero to initiate contact with him. Miller suggested that they develop shareware games that he would distribute. As a result, the id Software team began the development of Commander Keen , a Mario-style side-scrolling game for the PC, once again "borrowing" company computers to work on it at odd hours at the lake house at which they lived in Shreveport, Louisiana . On December 14, 1990, the first episode was released as shareware by Miller's company, Apogee, and orders began rolling in. Shortly after this, Softdisk management learned of the team's deception and suggested that they form a new company together, but the administrative staff at Softdisk threatened to resign if such an arrangement were made. In a legal settlement, the team was required to provide a game to Softdisk every two months for a certain period of time, but they would do so on their own. [ citation needed ] On February 1, 1991, id Software was founded.
The shareware distribution method was initially employed by id Software through Apogee Software to sell their products, such as the Commander Keen , Wolfenstein and Doom games. They would release the first part of their trilogy as shareware, then sell the other two installments by mail order . Only later (about the time of the release of Doom II ) did id Software release their games via more traditional shrink-wrapped boxes in stores (through other game publishers ).
id Software moved from the "cube-shaped" Mesquite office to a newly built location in Richardson, Texas .
On June 24, 2009, it was announced that id Software had been acquired by ZeniMax Media (owner of Bethesda Softworks ). The deal would eventually affect publishing deals id Software had before the acquisition, namely Rage , which was being published through Electronic Arts. [6]
On June 26, 2013, id Software president Todd Hollenshead quit after 17 years of service. [7]
On November 22, 2013, it was announced id Software co-founder and Technical Director John Carmack had fully resigned from the company to work full-time at Oculus VR which he joined as CTO in August 2013. [8] [9] He was the last of the original founders to leave the company.

Company name
The company writes its name with a lowercase id , which is pronounced as in "did" or "kid", and, according to the book Masters of Doom , the group identified itself as "Ideas from the Deep" in the early days of Softdisk but that, in the end, the name 'id' came from the phrase "in demand". [10] It is presented by the company as a reference to the id , a psychological concept introduced by Sigmund Freud . Evidence of the reference can be found as early as Wolfenstein 3D with the statement "that's id, as in the id, ego, and superego in the psyche" appearing in the game's documentation. Prior to an update to the website, id's History page made a direct reference to Freud. [11]

Key employees

Former key employees
Arranged in chronological order:

Game development

Technology
Starting with their first shareware game series, Commander Keen , id Software has licensed the core source code for the game, or what is more commonly known as the engine. Brainstormed by John Romero , id Software held a weekend session titled "The id Summer Seminar" in the summer of 1991 with prospective buyers including Scott Miller , George Broussard , Ken Rogoway, Jim Norwood and Todd Replogle . One of the nights, id Software put together an impromptu game known as "Wac-Man" to demonstrate not only the technical prowess of the Keen engine, but also how it worked internally.
id Software has developed their own game engine for each of their titles when moving to the next technological milestone, including Commander Keen , Wolfenstein 3D , ShadowCaster , [15] Doom , Quake , Quake II , and Quake III , as well as the technology used in making Doom 3 . After being used first for id Software's in-house game, the engines are licensed out to other developers. According to Eurogamer.net , "id Software has been synonymous with PC game engines since the concept of a detached game engine was first popularized". During the mid to late 1990s, "the launch of each successive round of technology it's been expected to occupy a headlining position", with the Quake III engine being most widely adopted of their engines. However id Tech 4 had far fewer licensees than the Unreal Engine from Epic Games , due to the long development time that went into Doom 3 which id Software had to release before licensing out that engine to others.
In conjunction with his self-professed affinity for sharing source code , John Carmack has open-sourced most of the major id Software engines under the GNU General Public License . Historically, the source code for each engine has been released once the code base is 5 years old. Consequently, many home grown projects have sprung up porting the code to different platforms, cleaning up the source code, or providing major modifications to the core engine. Wolfenstein 3D , DOOM and Quake engine ports are ubiquitous to nearly all platforms capable of running games, such as hand-held PCs, iPods, the PSP, the Nintendo DS and more. Impressive core modifications include DarkPlaces which adds stencil shadow volumes into the original Quake engine along with a more efficient network protocol. Another such project is ioquake3 , which maintains a goal of cleaning up the source code, adding features and fixing bugs. Even earlier id Software code, namely for Hovertank 3D and Catacomb 3D , was released in June 2014 by Flat Rock Software . [16]
The GPL release of the Quake III engine's source code was moved from the end of 2004 to August 2005 as the engine was still being licensed to commercial customers who would otherwise be concerned over the sudden loss in value of their recent investment.
On August 4, 2011, John Carmack revealed during his QuakeCon 2011 keynote that they will be releasing the source code of the Doom 3 engine ( id Tech 4 ) during the year. [17]
id Software publicly stated they would not support the Wii console (possibly due to technical limitations), [18] although they have since indicated that they may release titles on that platform (although it would be limited to their games released during the 1990s). [19]
Since id Software revealed their engine id Tech 5 , they call their engines " id Tech ", followed by a version number. [20] Older engines have retroactively been renamed to fit this scheme, with the Doom engine as id Tech 1.

Linux gaming
id Software was an early pioneer in the Linux gaming market, [21] and id Software's Linux games have been some of the most popular of the platform. Many id Software games won the Readers' and Editors' Choice awards of Linux Journal . [22] [23] [24] [25] Some id Software titles ported to Linux are Doom (the first id Software game to be ported), Quake , Quake II , Quake III Arena , Return to Castle Wolfenstein , Wolfenstein: Enemy Territory , Doom 3 , Quake 4 , and Enemy Territory: Quake Wars . Since id Software and some of its licensees released the source code for some of their previous games, several games which were not ported (such as Wolfenstein 3D , Spear of Destiny , Heretic , Hexen , Hexen II , and Strife ) can run on Linux and other operating systems natively through the use of source ports . Quake Live also launched with Linux support, although this, alongside OS X support, was later removed when changed to a standalone title. [26]
The tradition of porting to Linux was first started by Dave D. Taylor , with David Kirsch doing some later porting. Since Quake III Arena , Linux porting had been handled by Timothee Besset . The majority of all id Tech 4 games, including those made by other developers, have a Linux client available, the only current exceptions being Wolfenstein and Brink . Similarly, almost all of the games utilizing the Quake II engine have Linux ports, the only exceptions being those created by Ion Storm . Despite fears by the Linux gaming community that id Tech 5 would not be ported to that platform, [27] Timothee Besset in his blog has stated "I'll be damned if we don't find the time to get Linux builds done". [28] Besset has stated that id Software's primary justification for releasing Linux builds is better code quality, along with a technical interest for the platform. On January 26, 2012, Besset announced that he had left id. [29]
John Carmack has expressed his stance with regard to Linux builds in the past. [30] In December 2000 Todd Hollenshead expressed support for Linux: "All said, we will continue to be a leading supporter of the Linux platform because we believe it is a technically sound OS and is the OS of choice for many server ops." [31] However, on April 25, 2012, Carmack revealed that "there are no plans for a native Linux client" of id's most recent game, Rage . [32] In February 2013, Carmack argued for improving emulation as the "proper technical direction for gaming on Linux", though this was also due to Zenimax's refusal to support "unofficial binaries", given all prior ports (except for Quake III Arena , via Loki Software , and earlier versions of Quake Live ) having only ever been unofficial. [33] Carmack didn't mention official games Quake: The Offering and Quake II: Colossus ported by id Software to Linux and published by Macmillan Computer Publishing USA. [34]

Games

Commander Keen
The Commander Keen series, a platform game introducing one of the first smooth side-scrolling game engines for MS-DOS , brought id Software into the gaming mainstream. The game was very successful and spawned a whole series of titles. It was also the series of id Software that designer Tom Hall was most affiliated with. The first Commander Keen trilogy was released on December 14, 1990.

Wolfenstein
The company's breakout product was released on May 5, 1992: Wolfenstein 3D , a first-person shooter (FPS) with smooth 3D graphics that were unprecedented in computer games, and with violent gameplay that many gamers found engaging. After essentially founding an entire genre with this game, id Software created Doom , Doom II: Hell on Earth , Quake , Quake II , Quake III Arena , Quake 4 , and Doom 3 . Each of these first-person shooters featured progressively higher levels of graphical technology. Wolfenstein 3D spawned a prequel and a sequel: the prequel called Spear of Destiny , and the second, Return to Castle Wolfenstein , using the id Tech 3 engine . A third Wolfenstein sequel, simply titled Wolfenstein , was released by Raven Software , using the id Tech 4 engine . The Wolfenstein: The New Order reboot was developed using the id Tech 5 engine and released by MachineGames .

Doom
Eighteen months after their release of Wolfenstein 3D , on December 10, 1993, id Software released Doom which would again set new standards for graphic quality and graphic violence in computer gaming. Doom featured a sci-fi / horror setting with graphic quality that had never been seen on personal computers or even video game consoles . Doom became a cultural phenomenon and its violent theme would eventually launch a new wave of criticism decrying the dangers of violence in video games. Doom was ported to numerous platforms, inspired many knock-offs, and was eventually followed by the technically similar Doom II: Hell on Earth . id Software made its mark in video game history with the shareware release of Doom , and eventually revisited the theme of this game in 2004 with their release of Doom 3 . John Carmack said in an interview at QuakeCon 2007 that there will be a Doom 4 . It has been in development since May 7, 2008. [35] Doom , the fourth installation and a reboot of the Doom series, was released on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One on May 13, 2016.

Quake
On June 22, 1996, the release of Quake marked the second milestone in id Software history. Quake combined a cutting edge fully 3D engine, the Quake engine , with a distinctive art style to create critically acclaimed graphics for its time. Audio was not neglected either, having recruited Nine Inch Nails frontman Trent Reznor to facilitate unique sound effects and ambient music for the game. (A small homage was paid to Nine Inch Nails in the form of the band's logo appearing on the ammunition boxes for the nailgun weapon.) It also included the work of Michael Abrash . Furthermore, Quake' s main innovation, the capability to play a deathmatch (competitive gameplay between living opponents instead of against computer-controlled characters) over the Internet (especially through the add-on QuakeWorld ), seared the title into the minds of gamers as another smash hit.
In 2008, id Software was honored at the 59th Annual Technology & Engineering Emmy Awards for the pioneering work Quake represented in user modifiable games. [36] id Software is the only game development company ever honored twice by the National Academy of Television Arts & Sciences , having been given an Emmy Award in 2007 for creation of the 3D technology that underlies modern shooter video games. [37]
The Quake series continued with Quake II in 1997. Activision purchased a 49% stake in id Software, making it a second party which took publishing duties until 2009. However, the game is not a storyline sequel, and instead focuses on an assault on an alien planet, Stroggos, in retaliation for Strogg attacks on Earth . Most of the subsequent entries in the Quake franchise follow this storyline. Quake III Arena (1999), the next title in the series, has minimal plot, but centers around the "Arena Eternal", a gladiatorial setting created by an alien race known as the Vadrigar and populated by combatants plucked from various points in time and space. Among these combatants are some characters either drawn from or based on those in Doom (" Doomguy "), Quake (Ranger, Wrack), and Quake II (Bitterman, Tank Jr., Grunt, Stripe). Quake IV (2005) picks up where Quake II left off – finishing the war between the humans and Strogg. The spin-off Enemy Territory: Quake Wars acts as a prequel to Quake II , when the Strogg first invade Earth. It should be noted that Quake IV and Enemy Territory: Quake Wars were made by outside developers and not id.
There have also been a few other spin off games such as Quake Mobile in 2005 and Quake Live , an internet browser based modification of Quake III . A game called Quake Arena DS was planned and canceled for the Nintendo DS . John Carmack stated, at QuakeCon 2007, that the id Tech 5 engine would be used for a new Quake game.

Rage
Todd Hollenshead announced in May 2007 that id Software had begun working on an all new series that would be using a new engine. Hollenshead also mentioned that the title would be completely developed in-house, marking the first game since 2004's Doom 3 to be done so. [38] At 2007's WWDC , John Carmack showed the new engine called id Tech 5 . [39] Later that year, at QuakeCon 2007, the title of the new game was revealed as Rage . [40]
On July 14, 2008, id Software announced at the 2008 E3 event that they would be publishing Rage through Electronic Arts , and not id's longtime publisher Activision . [41] However, since then Zenimax has also announced that they are publishing Rage through Bethesda Softworks . [42]
On August 12, 2010, during Quakecon 2010, id Software announced Rage US ship date of September 13, 2011, and a European ship date of September 15, 2011. [43] During the keynote, id Software also demonstrated a Rage spin-off title running on the iPhone . [44] This technology demo later became Rage HD .

Other games
During its early days, id Software produced much more varied games; these include the early 3D first-person shooter experiments that led to Wolfenstein 3D and Doom – Hovertank 3D and Catacomb 3D . There was also the Rescue Rover series, which had two games – Rescue Rover and Rescue Rover 2 . Also there was John Romero 's Dangerous Dave series, which included such notables as the tech demo ( In Copyright Infringement ) which led to the Commander Keen engine, and the decently popular Dangerous Dave in the Haunted Mansion . In the Haunted Mansion was powered by the same engine as the earlier id Software game Shadow Knights , which was one of the several games written by id Software to fulfill their contractual obligation to produce games for Softdisk , where the id Software founders had been employed. id Software has also overseen several games using its technology that were not made in one of their IPs such as ShadowCaster , (early- id Tech 1 ), Heretic , Hexen: Beyond Heretic (id Tech 1), Hexen II ( Quake engine ), and Orcs and Elves ( Doom RPG engine).

Games developed by id Software

Games produced or published

Expansion packs

Other media
id Software has also been associated with novels since the publication of the original Doom novels . This has been restarted from 2008 onward with Matthew J. Costello 's (a story consultant for Doom 3 and now Rage ) new Doom 3 novels: Worlds on Fire and Maelstrom .
id Software became involved in film development when they were in the production team of the film adaption of their Doom franchise in 2005. In August 2007, Todd Hollenshead stated at QuakeCon 2007 that a Return to Castle Wolfenstein movie is in development which re-teams the Silent Hill writer/producer team, Roger Avary as writer and director and Samuel Hadida as producer.

Controversy
id Software was the target of controversy over two of their most popular games, Doom and the earlier Wolfenstein 3D :

Doom
Doom was notorious for its high levels of graphic violence [46] and satanic imagery, which generated controversy from a broad range of groups. Yahoo! Games listed it as one of the top ten most controversial games of all time. [47]
The game again sparked controversy throughout a period of school shootings in the United States when it was found that Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold , who committed the Columbine High School massacre in 1999, were avid players of the game. While planning for the massacre, Harris said that the killing would be "like playing Doom ", and "it'll be like the LA riots , the Oklahoma bombing , World War II , Vietnam , Duke Nukem and Doom all mixed together", and that his shotgun was "straight out of the game". [48] A rumor spread afterwards that Harris had designed a Doom level that looked like the high school, populated with representations of Harris's classmates and teachers, and that Harris practiced for his role in the shootings by playing the level over and over. Although Harris did design Doom levels , none of them were based on Columbine High School . [49]
While Doom and other violent video games have been blamed for nationally covered school shootings, 2008 research featured by Greater Good Science Center [50] shows that the two are not closely related. Harvard medical school researchers Cheryl Olson and Lawrence Kutner found that violent video games did not correlate to school shootings. The U.S. Secret Service and Department of Education analyzed 37 incidents of school violence and sought to develop a profile of school shooters; they discovered that the most common traits among shooters were that they were male and had histories of depression and attempted suicide. While many of the killers—like the vast majority of young teenage boys—did play video games, this study did not find a relationship between game play and school shootings. In fact, only one eighth of the shooters showed any special interest in violent video games, far less than the number of shooters who seemed attracted to books and movies with violent content. [51]

Wolfenstein 3D
As for Wolfenstein 3D , due to its use of Nazi symbols such as the swastika and the anthem of the Nazi Party , Horst-Wessel-Lied , as theme music, the PC version of the game was withdrawn from circulation in Germany in 1994, following a verdict by the Amtsgericht München on January 25, 1994. Despite the fact that Nazis are portrayed as the enemy in Wolfenstein , the use of those symbols is a federal offense in Germany unless certain circumstances apply. Similarly, the Atari Jaguar version was confiscated following a verdict by the Amtsgericht Berlin Tiergarten on December 7, 1994.
Due to concerns from Nintendo of America, the Super NES version was modified to not include any swastikas or Nazi references; furthermore, blood was replaced with sweat to make the game seem less violent, and the attack dogs in the game were replaced by giant mutant rats. Employees of id Software are quoted in The Official DOOM Player Guide about the reaction to Wolfenstein , claiming it to be ironic that it was morally acceptable to shoot people and rats, but not dogs. Two new weapons were added as well. The Super NES version was not as successful as the PC version. [ citation needed ]

People
In 2003, the book Masters of Doom chronicled the development of id Software, concentrating on the personalities and interaction of John Carmack and John Romero. Below are the key people involved with id's success.

John Carmack
Carmack's skill at 3D programming is widely recognized in the software industry and from its inception, he was id's lead programmer . On August 7, 2013, he joined Oculus VR , a company developing virtual reality headsets , and left id Software on November 22, 2013. [9]

John Romero
John Romero, who was forced to resign after the release of Quake , later formed the ill-fated company Ion Storm . There, he became infamous through the development of Daikatana , which was received negatively from reviewers and gamers alike upon release.
Both Tom Hall and John Romero have reputations as designers and idea men who have helped shape some of the key PC gaming titles of the 1990s.

Tom Hall
Tom Hall was forced to resign by id Software during the early days of Doom development, but not before he had some impact; for example, he was responsible for the inclusion of teleporters in the game. He was let go before the shareware release of Doom and then went to work for Apogee, developing Rise of the Triad with the "Developers of Incredible Power". When he finished work on that game, he found he was not compatible with the Prey development team at Apogee, and therefore left to join his ex-id Software compatriot John Romero at Ion Storm . Hall has frequently commented that if he could obtain the rights to Commander Keen , he would immediately develop another Keen title.

Sandy Petersen
Sandy Petersen was a level designer for 19 of the 27 levels in the original Doom title as well as 17 of the 32 levels of Doom II . As a fan of H.P. Lovecraft , his influence is apparent in the Lovecraftian feel of the monsters for Quake , and he created Inferno , the third "episode" of the first DOOM. He was forced to resign id Software during the production of Quake II and most of his work was scrapped before the title was released.

American McGee
American McGee was a level designer for Doom II , The Ultimate Doom , Quake , and Quake II . He was asked to resign after the release of Quake II , then moved to Electronic Arts where he gained industry notoriety with the development of his own game American McGee's Alice . After leaving Electronic Arts, he became an independent entrepreneur and game developer. McGee now heads independent development house Spicy Horse in Shanghai, where he works on various projects.

Notes
WebPage index: 00003
MS-DOS
MS-DOS ( / ˌ ɛ m ɛ s ˈ d ɒ s / EM -es- DOSS ; acronym for M icro s oft D isk O perating S ystem ) is a discontinued operating system for x86 -based personal computers mostly developed by Microsoft . Collectively, MS-DOS, its rebranding as IBM PC DOS, and some operating systems attempting to be compatible with MS-DOS, are sometimes referred to as "DOS" (which is also the generic acronym for disk operating system ). MS-DOS was the main operating system for IBM PC compatible personal computers during the 1980s and the early 1990s, when it was gradually superseded by operating systems offering a graphical user interface (GUI), in various generations of the graphical Microsoft Windows operating system.
MS-DOS resulted from a request in 1981 by IBM for an operating system to use in its IBM PC range of personal computers. [7] [8] Microsoft quickly bought the rights to 86-DOS from Seattle Computer Products , [9] and began work on modifying it to meet IBM's specification. IBM licensed and released it in August 1981 as PC DOS 1.0 for use in their PCs. Although MS-DOS and PC DOS were initially developed in parallel by Microsoft and IBM, the two products diverged after twelve years, in 1993, with recognizable differences in compatibility, syntax, and capabilities.
During its life, several competing products were released for the x86 platform, [10] and MS-DOS went through eight versions, until development ceased in 2000. [11] Initially MS-DOS was targeted at Intel 8086 processors running on computer hardware using floppy disks to store and access not only the operating system, but application software and user data as well. Progressive version releases delivered support for other mass storage media in ever greater sizes and formats, along with added feature support for newer processors and rapidly evolving computer architectures. Ultimately it was the key product in Microsoft's growth from a programming languages company to a diverse software development firm, providing the company with essential revenue and marketing resources. It was also the underlying basic operating system on which early versions of Windows ran as a GUI. It is a flexible operating system, and consumes negligible installation space.

History
MS-DOS was a renamed form of 86-DOS [12] –  owned by Seattle Computer Products , written by Tim Paterson . Development of 86-DOS took only six weeks, as it was basically a clone of Digital Research 's CP/M (for 8080/Z80 processors), ported to run on 8086 processors and with two notable differences compared to CP/M; an improved disk sector buffering logic and the introduction of FAT12 instead of the CP/M filesystem. This first version was shipped in August 1980. [5] Microsoft, which needed an operating system for the IBM Personal Computer [7] [8] hired Tim Paterson in May 1981 and bought 86-DOS 1.10 for $75,000 in July of the same year. Microsoft kept the version number, but renamed it MS-DOS. They also licensed MS-DOS 1.10/1.14 to IBM, who, in August 1981, offered it as PC DOS 1.0 as one of three operating systems [13] for the IBM 5150 , or the IBM PC . [5]
Within a year Microsoft licensed MS-DOS to over 70 other companies. [14] It was designed to be an OS that could run on any 8086-family computer. Each computer would have its own distinct hardware and its own version of MS-DOS, similar to the situation that existed for CP/M , and with MS-DOS emulating the same solution as CP/M to adapt for different hardware platforms. To this end, MS-DOS was designed with a modular structure with internal device drivers, minimally for primary disk drives and the console, integrated with the kernel and loaded by the boot loader, and installable device drivers for other devices loaded and integrated at boot time. The OEM would use a development kit provided by Microsoft to build a version of MS-DOS with their basic I/O drivers and a standard Microsoft kernel, which they would typically supply on disk to end users along with the hardware. Thus, there were many different versions of "MS-DOS" for different hardware, and there is a major distinction between an IBM-compatible (or ISA) machine and an MS-DOS [compatible] machine. Some machines, like the Tandy 2000 , were MS-DOS compatible but not IBM-compatible, so they could run software written exclusively for MS-DOS without dependence on the peripheral hardware of the IBM PC architecture.
This design would have worked well for compatibility, if application programs had only used MS-DOS services to perform device I/O, and indeed the same design philosophy is embodied in Windows NT (see Hardware Abstraction Layer ). However, in MS-DOS's early days, the greater speed attainable by programs through direct control of hardware was of particular importance, especially for games, which often pushed the limits of their contemporary hardware. Very soon an IBM-compatible architecture became the goal, and before long all 8086-family computers closely emulated IBM's hardware , and only a single version of MS-DOS for a fixed hardware platform was needed for the market. This version is the version of MS-DOS that is discussed here, as the dozens of other OEM versions of "MS-DOS" were only relevant to the systems they were designed for, and in any case were very similar in function and capability to some standard version for the IBM PC—often the same-numbered version, but not always, since some OEMs used their own proprietary version numbering schemes (e.g. labeling later releases of MS-DOS 1.x as 2.0 or vice versa)—with a few notable exceptions.
Microsoft omitted multi-user support from MS-DOS because Microsoft's Unix -based operating system, Xenix , was fully multi-user. [15] The company planned to over time improve MS-DOS so it would be almost indistinguishable from single-user Xenix, or XEDOS , which would also run on the Motorola 68000 , Zilog Z8000 , and the LSI-11 ; they would be upwardly compatible with Xenix, which Byte in 1983 described as "the multi-user MS-DOS of the future". [16] [17] Microsoft advertised MS-DOS and Xenix together, listing the shared features of its "single-user OS" and "the multi-user, multi-tasking , UNIX -derived operating system", and promising easy porting between them. [18] After the breakup of the Bell System , however, AT&T Computer Systems started selling UNIX System V . Believing that it could not compete with AT&T in the Unix market, Microsoft abandoned Xenix, and in 1987 transferred ownership of Xenix to the Santa Cruz Operation (SCO).
On 25 March 2014, Microsoft made the code to SCP MS-DOS 1.25 and a mixture of Altos MS-DOS 2.11 and TeleVideo PC DOS 2.11 available to the public under the Microsoft Research License Agreement , which makes the code source-available , but not open source as defined by Open Source Initiative or Free Software Foundation standards. [2] [3] [4] [19]
As an April Fools joke in 2015, Microsoft Mobile launched a Windows Phone application called MS-DOS Mobile which was presented as a new mobile operating system and worked similar to MS-DOS. [20]

Versions
Microsoft licensed or released versions of MS-DOS under different names like Lifeboat Associates "Software Bus 86" [21] aka SB-DOS , [10] COMPAQ-DOS , [21] NCR-DOS or Z-DOS [10] before it eventually enforced the MS-DOS name for all versions but the IBM one, which was originally called "IBM Personal Computer DOS", later shortened to IBM PC DOS . (Competitors released compatible DOS systems such as DR DOS and PTS-DOS that could also run DOS applications.)
The following versions of MS-DOS were released to the public: [22] [23]
Microsoft DOS was released through the OEM channel, until DRI released DR DOS 5.0 as a retail upgrade. With PC DOS 5.00.1, the IBM-Microsoft agreement started to end, and IBM entered the retail DOS market with IBM DOS 5.00.1, 5.02, 6.00 and PC DOS 6.1, 6.3, 7, 2000 and 7.1.
Localized versions of MS-DOS existed for different markets. [32] While Western issues of MS-DOS evolved around the same set of tools and drivers just with localized message languages and differing sets of supported codepages and keyboard layouts, some language versions were considerably different from Western issues and were adapted to run on localized PC hardware with additional BIOS services not available in Western PCs, support multiple hardware codepages for displays and printers, support DBCS, alternative input methods and graphics output. Affected issues include Japanese ( DOS/V ), Korean, Arabic (ADOS 3.3/5.0), Hebrew (HDOS 3.3/5.0), Russian ( RDOS 4.01 / 5.0 ) as well as some other Eastern European versions of DOS.

Competition
On microcomputers based on the Intel 8086 and 8088 processors, including the IBM PC and clones, the initial competition to the PC DOS/MS-DOS line came from Digital Research , whose CP/M operating system had inspired MS-DOS. In fact, there remains controversy as to whether QDOS was more or less plagiarised from early versions of CP/M code. Digital Research released CP/M-86 a few months after MS-DOS, and it was offered as an alternative to MS-DOS and Microsoft's licensing requirements, but at a higher price. Executable programs for CP/M-86 and MS-DOS were not interchangeable with each other; many applications were sold in both MS-DOS and CP/M-86 versions until MS-DOS became preponderant (later Digital Research operating systems could run both MS-DOS and CP/M-86 software). MS-DOS originally supported the simple .COM , which was modelled after a similar but binary incompatible format known from CP/M-80 . CP/M-86 instead supported a relocatable format using the file extension .CMD to avoid name conflicts with CP/M-80 and MS-DOS .COM files. MS-DOS version 1.0 added a more advanced relocatable . EXE executable file format.
Most of the machines in the early days of MS-DOS had differing system architectures and there was a certain degree of incompatibility, and subsequently vendor lock-in . Users who began using MS-DOS with their machines were compelled to continue using the version customized for their hardware, or face trying to get all of their proprietary hardware and software to work with the new system.
In the business world the 808x-based machines that MS-DOS was tied to faced competition from the Unix operating system which ran on many different hardware architectures. Microsoft itself sold a version of Unix for the PC called Xenix .
In the emerging world of home users, a variety of other computers based on various other processors were in serious competition with the IBM PC: the Apple II , early Apple Macintosh , the Commodore 64 and others did not use the 808x processor; many 808x machines of different architectures used custom versions of MS-DOS. At first all these machines were in competition. In time the IBM PC hardware configuration became dominant in the 808x market as software written to communicate directly with the PC hardware without using standard operating system calls ran much faster, but on true PC-compatibles only. Non-PC-compatible 808x machines were too small a market to have fast software written for them alone, and the market remained open only for IBM PCs and machines that closely imitated their architecture, all running either a single version of MS-DOS compatible only with PCs, or the equivalent IBM PC DOS. Most clones cost much less than IBM-branded machines of similar performance, and became widely used by home users, while IBM PCs had a large share of the business computer market.
Microsoft and IBM together began what was intended as the follow-on to MS-DOS/PC DOS, called OS/2 . When OS/2 was released in 1987, Microsoft began an advertising campaign announcing that "DOS is Dead" and stating that version 4 was the last full release. OS/2 was designed for efficient multi-tasking (as was standard in operating systems since 1963) and offered a number of advanced features that had been designed together with similar look and feel ; it was seen as the legitimate heir to the "kludgy" DOS platform.
MS-DOS had grown in spurts, with many significant features being taken or duplicated from Microsoft's other products and operating systems. MS-DOS also grew by incorporating, by direct licensing or feature duplicating, the functionality of tools and utilities developed by independent companies, such as Norton Utilities , PC Tools ( Microsoft Anti-Virus ), QEMM expanded memory manager, Stacker disk compression , and others.
During the period when Digital Research was competing in the operating system market some computers, like Amstrad PC1512 , were sold with floppy disks for two operating systems (only one of which could be used at a time), MS-DOS and CP/M-86 or a derivative of it. Digital Research produced DOS Plus , which was compatible with MS-DOS 2.11, supported CP/M-86 programs, had additional features including multi-tasking, and could read and write disks in CP/M and MS-DOS format.
While OS/2 was under protracted development, Digital Research released the MS-DOS compatible DR DOS 5.0, which included features only available as third-party add-ons for MS-DOS. Unwilling to lose any portion of the market, Microsoft responded by announcing the "pending" release of MS-DOS 5.0 in May 1990. This effectively killed most DR DOS sales until the actual release of MS-DOS 5.0 in June 1991. Digital Research brought out DR DOS 6.0, which sold well until the "pre-announcement" of MS-DOS 6.0 again stifled the sales of DR DOS.
Microsoft had been accused of carefully orchestrating leaks about future versions of MS-DOS in an attempt to create what in the industry is called FUD ( fear, uncertainty, and doubt ) regarding DR DOS. For example, in October 1990, shortly after the release of DR DOS 5.0, and long before the eventual June 1991 release of MS-DOS 5.0, stories on feature enhancements in MS-DOS started to appear in InfoWorld and PC Week . Brad Silverberg, then Vice President of Systems Software at Microsoft and General Manager of its Windows and MS-DOS Business Unit, wrote a forceful letter to PC Week (November 5, 1990), denying that Microsoft was engaged in FUD tactics ("to serve our customers better, we decided to be more forthcoming about version 5.0") and denying that Microsoft copied features from DR DOS:
The pact between Microsoft and IBM to promote OS/2 began to fall apart in 1990 when Windows 3.0 became a marketplace success. Much of Microsoft's further contributions to OS/2 also went into creating a third GUI replacement for DOS, Windows NT .
IBM, which had already been developing the next version of OS/2, carried on development of the platform without Microsoft and sold it as the alternative to DOS and Windows.

Legal issues
As a response to Digital Research 's DR DOS 6.0, which bundled SuperStor disk compression, Microsoft opened negotiations with Stac Electronics , vendor of the most popular DOS disk compression tool, Stacker. In the due diligence process, Stac engineers had shown Microsoft part of the Stacker source code. Stac was unwilling to meet Microsoft's terms for licensing Stacker and withdrew from the negotiations. Microsoft chose to license Vertisoft's DoubleDisk, using it as the core for its DoubleSpace disk compression. [34]
MS-DOS 6.0 and 6.20 were released in 1993, both including the Microsoft DoubleSpace disk compression utility program. Stac successfully sued Microsoft for patent infringement regarding the compression algorithm used in DoubleSpace. This resulted in the 1994 release of MS-DOS 6.21, which had disk-compression removed. Shortly afterwards came version 6.22, with a new version of the disk compression system, DriveSpace, which had a different compression algorithm to avoid the infringing code.
Prior to 1995, Microsoft licensed MS-DOS (and Windows) to computer manufacturers under three types of agreement: per-processor (a fee for each system the company sold), per-system (a fee for each system of a particular model), or per-copy (a fee for each copy of MS-DOS installed). The largest manufacturers used the per-processor arrangement, which had the lowest fee. This arrangement made it expensive for the large manufacturers to migrate to any other operating system, such as DR DOS. In 1991, the U.S. government Federal Trade Commission began investigating Microsoft's licensing procedures, resulting in a 1994 settlement agreement limiting Microsoft to per-copy licensing. Digital Research did not gain by this settlement, and years later its successor in interest, Caldera , sued Microsoft for damages in the Caldera v. Microsoft lawsuit. It was believed that the settlement ran in the order of $150 million, but was revealed in November 2009 with the release of the Settlement Agreement to be $280 million. [35]

Use of undocumented APIs
Microsoft also used a variety of tactics in MS-DOS and several of their applications and development tools that, while operating perfectly when running on genuine MS-DOS (and PC DOS), would break when run on another vendor's implementation of DOS. Notable examples of this practice included:

End of MS-DOS
With the release of Windows 95 (and continuing in the Windows 9x product line through to Windows ME ), an integrated version of MS-DOS was used for bootstrapping , troubleshooting, and backwards-compatibility with old DOS software, particularly games, and no longer released as a standalone product. In Windows 95, the DOS, called MS-DOS 7, can be booted separately, without the Windows GUI; this capability was retained through Windows 98 Second Edition. Windows ME removed the capability to boot its underlying MS-DOS 8.0 alone from a hard disk, but retained the ability to make a DOS boot floppy disk (called an "Emergency Boot Disk") and can be hacked to restore full access to the underlying DOS.
In contrast to the Windows 9x series, the Windows NT -derived 32-bit operating systems developed alongside the 9x series (Windows NT , 2000 , XP and newer) do not contain MS-DOS as part of the operating system, but provide a subset of DOS emulation to run DOS applications and provide DOS-like command prompt windows. 64-bit versions of Windows NT line do not provide DOS emulation and cannot run DOS applications natively. [36] Windows XP contains a copy of the Windows ME boot disk, stripped down to bootstrap only. This is accessible only by formatting a floppy as an "MS-DOS startup disk". Files like the driver for the CD-ROM support were deleted from the Windows ME bootdisk and the startup files ( AUTOEXEC.BAT and CONFIG.SYS ) no longer had content. This modified disk was the base for creating the MS-DOS image for Windows XP. Some of the deleted files can be recovered with an undelete tool. [37] With Windows Vista the files on the startup disk are dated 18 April 2005 but are otherwise unchanged, including the string "MS-DOS Version 8 © Copyright 1981–1999 Microsoft Corp" inside COMMAND.COM . Starting with Windows 10, the ability to create a DOS startup disk has been removed.
The only versions of MS-DOS currently recognized as stand-alone OSs and supported as such by Microsoft are MS-DOS 6.0 and 6.22, both of which remain available for download via their MSDN , volume license, and OEM license partner websites, for customers with valid login credentials. MS-DOS is still used in embedded x86 systems due to its simple architecture and minimal memory and processor requirements, though some current products have switched to the still-maintained open-source alternative FreeDOS .

Windows command-line interface
All versions of Microsoft Windows have had an MS-DOS-like command-line interface (CLI). This could run many DOS and variously Win32, OS/2 1.x and POSIX command line utilities in the same command-line session, allowing piping between commands. The user interface, and the icon up to Windows 2000, followed the native MS-DOS interface.
The 16-bit versions of Windows (up to 3.11) ran as a Graphical User Interface (GUI) on top of MS-DOS. With Windows 95 , 98, 98 SE and ME, the MS-DOS part was (superficially) integrated, treating both operating systems as a complete package, though the DOS component could actually stand alone. The command line accessed the DOS command line (usually COMMAND.COM ), through a Windows module (WINOLDAP.MOD). [ clarification needed ]
A new line of Windows, (Windows NT), boot through a kernel whose sole purpose is to load Windows. One can not run Win32 applications in the loader system in the manner that OS/2, UNIX or Consumer Windows can launch character mode sessions.
The command session permits running of various supported command line utilities from Win32, MS-DOS, OS/2 1.x and POSIX. The emulators for MS-DOS, OS/2 and POSIX use the host's window in the same way that Win16 applications use the Win32 explorer. Using the host's window allows one to pipe output between emulations.
The MS-DOS emulation is done through the NTVDM (NT Virtual DOS Machine). This is a modified SoftPC (a former product similar to VirtualPC), running a modified MS-DOS 5 (NTIO.SYS and NTDOS.SYS). The output is handled by the console DLLs, so that the program at the prompt ( CMD.EXE , 4NT.EXE , TCC.EXE ), can see the output. 64-bit Windows does not have either the DOS emulation, or the DOS commands (EDIT, DEBUG, EDLIN ), that come with 32-bit Windows.
The DOS version returns 5.00 or 5.50, depending on which API function is used to determine it. Utilities from MS-DOS 5.00 run in this emulation without modification. The very early beta programs of NT show MS-DOS 30.00, but programs running in MS-DOS 30.00 would assume that OS/2 was in control.
The OS/2 emulation is handled through OS2SS.EXE and OS2.EXE, and DOSCALLS.DLL. OS2.EXE is a version of the OS/2 shell (CMD.EXE), which passes commands down to the OS2SS.EXE, and input-output to the Windows NT shell. Windows 2000 was the last version of NT to support OS/2. The emulation is OS/2 1.30.
POSIX is emulated through the POSIX shell, but no emulated shell; the commands are handled directly in CMD.EXE.
The Command Prompt is often called the MS-DOS prompt. In part, this was the official name for it in Windows 9x and early versions of Windows NT (NT 3.5 and earlier), and in part because the SoftPC emulation of DOS redirects output into it. Actually only COMMAND.COM and other 16bit commands run in a NTVDM with AUTOEXEC.NT and CONFIG.NT initialisation determined by _default.pif , optionally permitting the use of Win32 console applications and internal commands with a NTCMDPROMPT directive.
Win32 console applications use CMD.EXE as their command prompt shell. This confusion does not exist under OS/2 because there are separate DOS and OS/2 prompts, and running a DOS program under OS/2 will launch a separate DOS window to run the application.
All versions of Windows for Itanium (no longer sold by Microsoft) and x86-64 architectures no longer include the NTVDM and can therefore no longer natively run MS-DOS or 16-bit Windows applications. There are alternatives in the form of virtual machine emulators such as Microsoft's own Virtual PC , as well as VMware , DOSBox , and others.

Legacy compatibility
From 1983 onwards, various companies worked on graphical user interfaces (GUIs) capable of running on PC hardware. However, this required duplicated effort and did not provide much consistency in interface design (even between products from the same company).
Later, in 1985, Microsoft Windows was released as Microsoft's first attempt at providing a consistent user interface (for applications). The early versions of Windows ran on top of MS-DOS. At first Windows met with little success, but this was also true for most other companies' efforts as well, for example GEM . After version 3.0, Windows gained market acceptance.
Windows 9x used the DOS boot process to launch into protected mode. Basic features related to the file system, such as long file names, were only available to DOS when running as a subsystem of Windows. Windows NT runs independently of DOS but includes NTVDM , a component for simulating a DOS environment for legacy applications.

Related systems
MS-DOS compatible systems include:
Microsoft manufactured IBM PC DOS for IBM. It and MS-DOS were identical products that eventually diverged starting with PC DOS version 6.1.
Digital Research 's DR-DOS is sometimes regarded as a clone of MS-DOS, but it did not follow Microsoft's version numbering scheme. For example, MS-DOS 4, released in July 1988, was followed by DR DOS 5.0 in May 1990. MS-DOS 5.0 came in April 1991, with DR DOS 6.0 being released the following June. [38]
These products are collectively referred to as "DOS," even though "Disk Operating System" is a generic term used on other systems unrelated to the x86 and IBM PC. "MS-DOS" can also be a generic reference to DOS on IBM PC compatible computers.
What made the difference in the end was Microsoft's control of the Windows platform and their programming practices which intentionally made Windows appear as if it ran poorly on competing versions of DOS. [33] Digital Research had to release interim releases to circumvent Windows limitations inserted artificially, [33] designed specifically to provide Microsoft with an unfair competitive advantage. [33]

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00004
Allies of World War II
The Allies of World War II , called the United Nations from the 1 January 1942 declaration , were the countries that together opposed the Axis powers during the Second World War (1939–1945). The Allies promoted the alliance as seeking to stop German, Japanese and Italian aggression.
At the start of the war on 1 September 1939, the Allies consisted of France , Poland and the United Kingdom , and dependent states , such as the British India . Within days they were joined by the independent Dominions of the British Commonwealth : Australia , Canada , New Zealand and South Africa . [1] Poland was a minor factor after its defeat in 1939; France was a minor factor after its defeat in 1940. From the German invasion of North Europe to the Balkan Campaign , Netherlands , Belgium , Greece and Yugoslavia joined the Allies. After first having cooperated with Germany in invading Poland whilst remaining neutral in the Allied-Axis conflict, the Soviet Union perforce joined the Allies in June 1941 after being invaded by Germany .The United States provided war materiel and money all along, and officially joined in December 1941 after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . China had already been into a prolonged war with Japan since the Lugou Bridge Incident of 1937, but officially joined the Allies in 1941.
The alliance was formalised by the Declaration by United Nations , from 1 January 1942. However, the name United Nations was rarely used to describe the Allies during the war. The leaders of the "Big Three" – the UK, the Soviet Union, and the United States – controlled Allied strategy; relations between the United Kingdom and the United States were especially close . China and the Big Three were referred as a " trusteeship of the powerful", [2] then were recognized as the Allied " Big Four " in Declaration by United Nations [3] and later the " Four Policemen " of the United Nations.
In 1945, the Allied nations became the basis of the United Nations . [4]

Origins and creation
The origins of the Allied powers stem from the Allies of World War I and cooperation of the victorious powers at the Paris Peace Conference, 1919 . Germany resented signing Treaty of Versailles . The new Weimar republic's legitimacy became shaken. However, the 1920s were peaceful.
With the Stock Market Crash of 1929 and the ensuing Great Depression , political unrest in Europe soared including the rise in support of revanchist nationalists in Germany who falsy blamed the severity of the economic crisis on the Treaty of Versailles. By the early 1930s, the Nazi Party led by Adolf Hitler became the dominant revanchist movement in Germany and Hitler and the Nazis gained power in 1933. The Nazi regime demanded the immediate cancellation of the Treaty of Versailles and made claims to German-populated Austria, and German-populated territories of Czechoslovakia. The likelihood of war was high, and the question was whether it could be avoided through strategies such as appeasement .
In Asia, when Japan seized Manchuria in 1931, the League of Nations condemned it for aggression against China. Japan responded by leaving the League of Nations in March 1933. After four quiet years, the Sino-Japanese War erupted in 1937 with Japanese forces invading China. The League of Nations condemned Japan's actions and initiated sanctions on Japan. The United States, in particular, was angered at Japan and sought to support China.
In March 1939, Germany took over Czechoslovakia, violating the Munich Agreement signed six months before, and demonstrating that the appeasement policy was a failure. Britain and France decided that Hitler had no intention to uphold diplomatic agreements and responded by preparing for war. On 31 March 1939, Britain formed the Anglo-Polish military alliance in an effort to avert a German attack on the country. Also, the French had a long-standing alliance with Poland since 1921 . The Soviet Union sought an alliance with the western powers, but Hitler ended the risk of a war with Stalin by signing the Nazi–Soviet non-aggression pact in August 1939. The agreement secretly divided the independent nations of eastern Europe between the two powers and assured adequate oil supplies for the German war machine. On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland ; two days later Britain and France declared war on Germany. Then, on 17 September 1939, the Soviet Union invaded Poland from the east. A Polish government-in-exile was set up and it continued to be one of the Allies, a model followed by other occupied countries. After a quiet winter, Germany in April 1940 invaded and quickly defeated Denmark, Norway, Belgium, the Netherlands and France. Britain and its Empire stood alone against Hitler and Mussolini. In June 1941, Hitler broke the non-aggression agreement with Stalin and Germany invaded the Soviet Union. In December, Japan attacked the US and Britain. The main lines of World War II had formed.

Major affiliated state combatants
During December 1941, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt devised the name "United Nations" for the Allies and proposed it to British Prime Minister Winston Churchill . [5] [6] He referred to the Big Three and China as a " trusteeship of the powerful", and then later the " Four Policemen ". [2] The Declaration by United Nations on 1 January 1942 was the basis of the modern United Nations (UN). [7] At the Potsdam Conference of July–August 1945, Roosevelt's successor, Harry S. Truman , proposed that the foreign ministers of China, France, the Soviet Union, United Kingdom, and the United States "should draft the peace treaties and boundary settlements of Europe", which led to the creation of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the "Big Five", and soon thereafter the establishment of those states as the permanent members of the UNSC . [8]

United Kingdom

War declared
Great Britain and other members of the British Commonwealth , most known as the Dominions , declared war on Germany separately from 3 September 1939 with the UK first, all within one week of each other; these countries were Canada , Australia , New Zealand , India and the Union of South Africa .

Colonies and dependencies

In Africa
British West Africa and the British colonies in East and Southern Africa participated, mainly in the North African, East African and Middle-Eastern theatres. Two West African and one East African division served in the Burma Campaign .
Southern Rhodesia was a self-governing colony, having received responsible government in 1923. It was not a sovereign dominion. It governed itself internally and controlled its own armed forces, but had no diplomatic autonomy, and, therefore, was officially at war as soon as Britain was at war. The Southern Rhodesian colonial government issued a symbolic declaration of war nevertheless on 3 September 1939, which made no difference diplomatically, but preceded the declarations of war made by all other British dominions and colonies. [9]

In the Americas
These included: the British West Indies , British Honduras , British Guiana and the Falkland Islands .
Newfoundland was ruled as a royal colony in 1933–49, with a governor appointed by London who made the decisions.

In Asia
British India included the areas and peoples covered by later India , Bangladesh , Pakistan and (until 1937) Burma/Myanmar , which later became a separate colony.
British Malaya covers the areas of Peninsular Malaysia and Singapore , while British Borneo covers the area of Brunei , including Sabah and Sarawak of Malaysia.
Territories controlled by the Colonial Office , namely the Crown Colonies , were controlled politically by the UK and therefore also entered hostilities with Britain's declaration of war. At the outbreak of World War II, the British Indian Army numbered 205,000 men. Later during World War II, the Indian Army became the largest all-volunteer force in history, rising to over 2.5 million men in size.[10] These forces included tank, artillery and airborne forces. Indian soldiers earned 30 Victoria Crosses during the Second World War. It suffered 87,000 military casualties (more than any Crown colony but fewer than the United Kingdom). The UK suffered 382,000 military casualties.
Protectorates included: Kuwait was a protectorate of the United Kingdom formally established in 1920. The Trucial States were protectorates in the Persian Gulf.
Palestine was a mandate dependency created in the peace agreements after World War I from former territory of the Ottoman Empire . Iraq

In Europe
The Cyprus Regiment was formed by the British Government during the Second World War and made part of the British Army structure. It was mostly Greek Cypriots volunteers and Turkish speaking Cypriot inhabitants of Cyprus but also included other Commonwealth nationalities. On a brief visit to Cyprus in 1943, Winston Churchill praised the "soldiers of the Cyprus Regiment who have served honourably on many fields from Libya to Dunkirk". About 30,000 Cypriots served in the Cyprus Regiment. The regiment was involved in action from the very start and served at Dunkirk , in the Greek Campaign ( Battle of Greece ) (about 600 soldiers were captured in Kalamata in 1941), North Africa ( Operation Compass ), France, the Middle East and Italy. Many soldiers were taken prisoner especially at the beginning of the war and were interned in various POW camps ( Stalag ) including Lamsdorf ( Stalag VIII-B ), Stalag IVC at Wistritz bei Teplitz and Stalag 4b near Most in the Czech Republic. The soldiers captured in Kalamata were transported by train to prisoner of war camps.

China
In the 1920s the Soviet Union provided military assistance to Kuomintang , or the Nationalists and helped reorganize their party along Leninist lines: a unification of party, state, and army. In exchange the Nationalists agreed to let members of the Chinese Communist Party join the Nationalists on an individual basis. However, following the nominal unification of China at the end of the Northern Expedition in 1928, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek purged leftists from his party and fought against the revolting Chinese Communist Party, former warlords , and other militarist factions. A fragmented China provided easy opportunities for Japan to gain territories piece by piece without engaging in total war. Following the 1931 Mukden Incident , the puppet state of Manchukuo was established. Throughout the early to mid-1930s, Chiang's anti-communist and anti-militarist campaigns continued while he fought small, incessant conflicts against Japan, usually followed by unfavorable settlements and concessions after military defeats.
In 1936 Chiang was forced to cease his anti-communist military campaigns after his kidnap and release by Zhang Xueliang , and reluctantly formed a nominal alliance with the Communists, while the Communists agreed to fight under the nominal command of the Nationalists against the Japanese. Following the Marco Polo Bridge Incident of 7 July 1937, China and Japan became embroiled in a full-scale war. The Soviet Union, wishing to keep China in the fight against Japan, supplied China with military assistance until 1941, when it signed a non-aggression pact with Japan . Continuous clashes between the Communists and Nationalists behind enemy lines cumulated in a major military conflict between these two former allies that effectively ended their cooperation against the Japanese, and China had been divided between the internationally recognized Nationalist China under the leadership of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and the Communist China under the leadership of Mao Zedong until the Japanese surrendered in 1945.

Factions

Nationalists
Prior to the alliance of Germany and Italy to Japan, the Nationalist Government held close relations with both Germany and Italy. In the early 1930s, Sino-German cooperation between the Nationalist Government and Germany in military and industrial matters. Nazi Germany provided the largest proportion of Chinese arms imports and technical expertise. Relations between the Nationalist Government and Italy during the 1930s varied, however even after the Nationalist Government followed League of Nations sanctions against Italy for its invasion of Ethiopia , the international sanctions proved unsuccessful, and relations between the Fascist government in Italy and the Nationalist Government in China returned to normal shortly afterwards. [10] Up until 1936, Mussolini had provided the Nationalists with Italian military air and naval missions to help the Nationalists fight against Japanese incursions and communist insurgents. [10] Italy also held strong commercial interests and a strong commercial position in China supported by the Italian concession in Tianjin . [10] However, after 1936 the relationship between the Nationalist Government and Italy changed due to a Japanese diplomatic proposal to recognize the Italian Empire that included occupied Ethiopia within it in exchange for Italian recognition of Manchukuo , Italian Foreign Minister Galeazzo Ciano accepted this offer by Japan, and on 23 October 1936 Japan recognized the Italian Empire and Italy recognized Manchukuo, as well as discussing increasing commercial links between Italy and Japan. [11]
The Nationalist Government held close relations with the United States . The United States opposed Japan's invasion of China in 1937 that it considered an illegal violation of China's sovereignty , and offered the Nationalist Government diplomatic, economic, and military assistance during its war against Japan. In particular, the United States sought to bring the Japanese war effort to a complete halt by imposing a full embargo on all trade between the United States to Japan, Japan was dependent on the United States for 80 percent of its petroleum , resulting in an economic and military crisis for Japan that could not continue its war effort with China without access to petroleum. [12] In November 1940, American military aviator Claire Lee Chennault upon observing the dire situation in the air war between China and Japan, set out to organize a volunteer squadron of American fighter pilots to fight alongside the Chinese against Japan, known as the Flying Tigers . [13] US President Franklin D. Roosevelt accepted dispatching them to China in early 1941. [13] However, they only became operational shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor.
The Soviet Union recognised the Republic of China but urged reconciliation with the Communist Party of China and inclusion of Communists in the government. [14] The Soviet Union also urged military and cooperation between Nationalist China and Communist China during the war. [14]
Even though the Republic of China had been fighting the longest among all the Allied powers, it only officially joined the Allies after the attack on Pearl Harbor, on 7 December 1941. China fought the Japanese Empire before joining the Allies In the Pacific War . Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek thought Allied victory was assured with the entrance of the United States into the war, and he declared war on Germany and the other Axis nations. However, Allied aid remained low because the Burma Road was closed and the Allies suffered a series of military defeats against Japan early on in the campaign. General Sun Li-jen led the R.O.C. forces to the relief of 7,000 British forces trapped by the Japanese in the Battle of Yenangyaung . He then reconquered North Burma and re-established the land route to China by the Ledo Road . But the bulk of military aid did not arrive until the spring of 1945. More than 1.5 million Japanese troops were trapped in the China Theatre, troops that otherwise could have been deployed elsewhere if China had collapsed and made a separate peace.

Communists
Communist China had been tacitly supported by the Soviet Union since the 1920s, though the Soviet Union diplomatically recognised the Republic of China, Joseph Stalin supported cooperation between the Nationalists and the Communists—including pressuring the Nationalist Government to grant the Communists state and military positions in the government. [14] This was continued into the 1930s that fell in line with the Soviet Union's subversion policy of popular fronts to increase communists' influence in governments. [14] The Soviet Union urged military and cooperation between Soviet China and Nationalist China during China's war against Japan. [14] Initially Mao Zedong accepted the demands of the Soviet Union and in 1938 had recognized Chiang Kai-shek as the "leader" of the "Chinese people". [15] In turn, the Soviet Union accepted Mao's tactic of "continuous guerilla warfare" in the countryside that involved a goal of extending the Communist bases, even if it would result in increased tensions with the Nationalists. [15]
After the breakdown of their cooperation with the Nationalists in 1941, the Communists prospered and grew as the war against Japan dragged on, building up their sphere of influence wherever opportunities were presented, mainly through rural mass organizations, administrative, land and tax reform measures favoring poor peasants; while the Nationalists attempted to neutralize the spread of Communist influence by military blockade and fighting the Japanese at the same time. [16]
The Communist Party's position in China was boosted further upon the Soviet invasion of Manchuria in August 1945 against the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo and the Japanese Kwantung Army in China and Manchuria . Upon the intervention of the Soviet Union against Japan in World War II in 1945, Mao Zedong in April and May 1945 had planned to mobilize 150,000 to 250,000 soldiers from across China to work with forces of the Soviet Union in capturing Manchuria. [17]

France

War declared
After Germany invaded Poland, France declared war on Germany on 3 September 1939. [18] In January 1940, French Prime Minister Édouard Daladier made a major speech denouncing the actions of Germany:
France experienced several major phases of action during World War II:

Colonies and dependencies

In Africa
In Africa these included: French West Africa , French Equatorial Africa , the League of Nations mandates of French Cameroun and French Togo , Madagascar , French Somaliland , and the protectorates of French Tunisia and French Morocco .
French Algeria was then not a colony or dependency but a fully-fledged part of metropolitan France .

In Asia and Oceania
In Asia these included: French Polynesia , Wallis and Futuna , New Caledonia , the New Hebrides , French Indochina , French India , the mandates of Greater Lebanon and French Syria . The French government in 1936 attempted to grant independence to its mandate of Syria in the Franco-Syrian Treaty of Independence of 1936 signed by France and Syria. However, opposition to the treaty grew in France and the treaty was not ratified. Syria had become an official republic in 1930 and was largely self-governing. In 1941, a British-led invasion supported by Free French forces expelled Vichy French forces in operation Exporter .

In the Americas
In the Americas these included: Martinique , Guadeloupe , French Guiana and Saint Pierre and Miquelon .

Soviet Union

Outbreak
German invasion of the Soviet Union, Operation Barbarossa , began on 22 June 1941. General Secretary Joseph Stalin and the government of the Soviet Union described the Soviet war effort as a war being fought by the Soviet people for their survival. [20] Stalin had supported popular front movements of anti-fascists including communists and non-communists from 1935 to 1939. [21] The popular front strategy was terminated from 1939 to 1941 when the Soviet Union cooperated with Germany in 1939 in the occupation and partitioning of Poland while the Soviet Union refused to endorse either the Allies or the Axis from 1939 to 1941, as it called the Allied-Axis conflict an "imperialist war". [21] After the invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, Stalin endorsed the Western Allies as part of a renewed popular front strategy against Germany and called for the international communist movement to make a coalition with all those who opposed the Nazis. [21]
The Soviet Union intervened against Japan and its client state in Manchuria in 1945, cooperating with the Nationalist Government of China and Nationalist Party led by Chiang Kai-shek ; though also cooperating, preferring, and encouraging the Communist Party led by Mao Zedong to take effective control of Manchuria after expelling Japanese forces. [22]

History
In the lead up to the war between the Soviet Union and Germany, relations between the Soviet Union and Germany underwent several stages. Stalin studied Hitler, including reading Mein Kampf and from it knew of Hitler's desire to destroy the Soviet Union. [23] In 1933, the Soviet Union had immediate concerns with the threat of a potential German invasion of the country should Germany attempt a conquest of the Baltic states, and in December of that year, Polish-Soviet negotiations began for the issuing of a joint declaration by the two countries guaranteeing the sovereignty of the Baltic states. [24] However, Poland withdrew from the negotiations following German and Finnish objections. [24] The Soviet Union and Germany at this time competed with each other for influence in Poland. [25] The Soviet government also was concerned with the anti-Soviet sentiment in Poland and particularly Józef Piłsudski 's proposed Polish federation that would include the territories of Poland, Lithuania, Belarus, and Ukraine within it that threatened the territorial integrity of the Soviet Union. [26]
On 20 August 1939, forces of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics under General Georgy Zhukov , together with the People's Republic of Mongolia eliminated the threat of conflict in the east with a decisive victory over Japan at the Battle of Khalkhin Gol in eastern Mongolia.
On the same day, Soviet party leader Joseph Stalin received a telegram from German Chancellor Adolf Hitler , suggesting that German Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop fly to Moscow for diplomatic talks. (After receiving a lukewarm response throughout the spring and summer, Stalin abandoned attempts for a better diplomatic relationship with France and the United Kingdom.) [27]
On 23 August, Ribbentrop and Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov signed the non-aggression pact including secret protocols dividing Eastern Europe into defined "spheres of influence" for the two regimes, and specifically concerning the partition of the Polish state in the event of its "territorial and political rearrangement". [28]
On 15 September 1939, Stalin concluded a durable ceasefire with Japan, to take effect the following day (it would be upgraded to a nonaggression pact in April 1941). [29] The day after that, 17 September, Soviet forces invaded Poland from the east . Although some fighting continued until 5 October, the two invading armies held at least one joint military parade on 25 September , and reinforced their non-military partnership with a German–Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Demarcation on 28 September.
On 30 November, the Soviet Union attacked Finland , for which it was expelled from the League of Nations . In the following year of 1940, while the world's attention was focussed upon the German invasion of France and Norway, [30] the USSR militarily [31] occupied the Baltic states [32] of Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania as well as parts of Romania .
German-Soviet treaties were brought to an end by the German surprise attack on the USSR on 22 June 1941. The Soviet Union soon entered in alliance with the United Kingdom. Following the USSR, a number of other communist , pro-Soviet or Soviet-controlled forces fought against the Axis powers during the Second World War. They were as follows: the Albanian National Liberation Front , the Chinese Red Army , the Greek National Liberation Front , the Hukbalahap , the Malayan Communist Party , the People's Republic of Mongolia , the Polish People's Army , the Tuvan People's Republic (annexed by Soviet Union in 1944), [33] the Viet Minh and the Yugoslav Partisans .

United States

War justifications
The United States had indirectly supported Britain's war effort against Germany up to 1941 and declared its opposition to territorial aggrandizement. Materiel support to Britain was provided while the U.S. was officially neutral via the Lend Lease Act starting in 1941.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Prime Minister Winston Churchill in August 1941 promulgated the Atlantic Charter that pledged commitment to achieving "the final destruction of Nazi tyranny". [34] Signing the Atlantic Charter, and thereby joining the "United Nations" was the way a nation joined the Allies, and also became eligible for membership in the United Nations world body that formed in 1945.
The US strongly supported the Nationalist Government in China in its war with Japan, and provided military equipment, supplies, and volunteers to the Nationalist Government of China to assist in its war effort. [35] In December 1941 Japan opened the war with its attack on Pearl Harbor , the US declared war on Japan, and Japan's allies Germany and Italy declared war on the US, bringing the US into World War II.

History
On 8 December 1941, following the attack on Pearl Harbor , the United States Congress declared war on Japan at the request of President Franklin D. Roosevelt . This was followed by Germany and Italy declaring war on the United States on 11 December, bringing the country into the European theatre.
The US led Allied forces in the Pacific theatre against Japanese forces from 1941 to 1945. From 1943 to 1945, the US led and coordinated the Western Allies' war effort in Europe under the leadership of General Dwight Eisenhower .
The surprise attack on Pearl Harbor followed by Japan's swift attacks on Allied locations throughout the Pacific, resulted in major US losses in the first several months in the war, including losing control of the Philippines , Guam , Wake Island and several Aleutian islands including Attu and Kiska to Japanese forces. American naval forces attained some early successes against Japan. One was the bombing of Japanese industrial centres in the Doolittle Raid . Another was repelling a Japanese invasion of Port Moresby in New Guinea during the Battle of the Coral Sea . [36] A major turning point in the Pacific War was the Battle of Midway where American naval forces were outnumbered by Japanese forces that had been sent to Midway to draw out and destroy American aircraft carriers in the Pacific and seize control of Midway that would place Japanese forces in proximity to Hawaii. [37] However American forces managed to sink four of Japan's six large aircraft carriers that had initiated the attack on Pearl Harbor along with other attacks on Allied forces. Afterwards the US began an offensive against Japanese-captured positions. The Guadalcanal Campaign from 1942 to 1943 was a major contention point where American and Japanese forces struggled to gain control of Guadalcanal .

Colonies and dependencies

In the Americas and the Pacific
The United States held multiple dependencies in the Americas, such as Alaska , the Panama Canal Zone , Puerto Rico , and the U.S. Virgin Islands .
In the Pacific it held multiple island dependencies such as American Samoa , Guam , Hawaii , Midway Islands , Wake Island and others. These dependencies were directly involved in the Pacific campaign of the war.

In Asia
The Commonwealth of the Philippines was a sovereign protectorate referred to as an "associated state" of the United States. From late 1941 to 1944, the Philippines was occupied by Japanese forces, who established the Second Philippine Republic as a client state that had nominal control over the country.

Minor affiliated state combatants

Australia
Australia was a sovereign Dominion under the Australian monarchy , as per the Statute of Westminster 1931 . At the start of the war Australia followed Britain's foreign policies, and accordingly declared war against Germany on 3 September 1939. Australian foreign policy became more independent after the Australian Labor Party formed government in October 1941, and Australia separately declared war against Finland, Hungary and Romania on 8 December 1941 and against Japan the next day. [38]

Belgium
Before the war, Belgium had pursued a policy of neutrality and only became an Allied member after being invaded by Germany on 10 May 1940. During the ensuing fighting, Belgian forces fought alongside French and British forces against the invaders. While the British and French were struggling against the fast German advance elsewhere on the front, the Belgian forces were pushed into a pocket to the north. Finally, on 28 May, the King Leopold III surrendered himself and his military to the Germans, having decided the Allied cause was lost. The legal Belgian government was reformed as a government in exile in London . Belgian troops and pilots continued to fight on the Allied side as the Free Belgian Forces . Belgium itself was occupied, but a sizeable Resistance was formed and was loosely coordinated by the government in exile and other Allied powers.
British and Canadian troops arrived in Belgium in September 1944 and the capital, Brussels , was liberated on 6 September. Because of the Ardennes Offensive , the country was only fully liberated in early 1945.

Colonies and dependencies
Belgium had the colony of the Belgian Congo and the League of Nations mandate of Ruanda-Urundi . The Belgian Congo was not occupied and remained loyal to the Allies as an important economic asset while its deposits of uranium were useful to the Allied efforts to develop the atomic bomb. Troops from the Belgian Congo participated in the East African Campaign against the Italians. The colonial Force Publique also served in other theatres including Madagascar, the Middle-East, India and Burma within British units.

Brazil
Initially, Brazil maintained a position of neutrality, trading with both the Allies and the Axis Powers , while Brazilian president Getúlio Vargas 's quasi- Fascist policies indicated a leaning toward the Axis powers. However, as the war progressed, trade with the Axis countries became almost impossible and the United States initiated forceful diplomatic and economic efforts to bring Brazil onto the Allied side.
At the beginning of 1942, Brazil permitted the United States to set up air bases on its territory, especially in Natal , strategically located at the easternmost corner of the South American continent, and on 28 January the country severed diplomatic relations with Germany, Japan, and Italy. After that, 36 Brazilian merchant ships were sunk by the German and Italian navies, which led the Brazilian government to declare war against Germany and Italy on 22 August 1942.
Brazil then sent a 25,700 strong Expeditionary Force to Europe that fought mainly on the Italian front , from September 1944 to May 1945. Also, the Brazilian Navy and Air Force acted in the Atlantic Ocean from the middle of 1942 until the end of the war. Brazil was the only South American country to send troops to fight in the European theatre in the Second World War.

Canada
Canada was a sovereign Dominion under the Canadian monarchy , as per the Statute of Westminster 1931. In a symbolic statement of autonomous foreign policy Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King delayed parliament's vote on a declaration of war for seven days after Britain had declared war. Canada was the last member of the Commonwealth to declare war on Germany on 10 September 1939. [39]

Cuba
Because of Cuba 's geographical position at the entrance of the Gulf of Mexico , Havana 's role as the principal trading port in the West Indies , and the country's natural resources, Cuba was an important participant in the American Theater of World War II , and subsequently one of the greatest beneficiaries of the United States ' Lend-Lease program. Cuba declared war on the Axis powers in December 1941, [40] making it one of the first Latin American countries to enter the conflict, and by the war's end in 1945 its military had developed a reputation as being the most efficient and cooperative of all the Caribbean nations. [41] On 15 May 1943, the Cuban patrol boat CS-13 sank the German submarine U-176 . [42] [43]

Czechoslovakia
Czechoslovakia along with the United Kingdom and France attempted to resolve German irredentist claims to the Sudetenland region in 1938 with the Munich Agreement , however in March 1939, Czechoslovakia was invaded by Germany and partitioned between Germany, Hungary, Poland, and a German client state of Slovakia. The Czechoslovak government-in-exile joined the Allies, the occupation and partition of Czechoslovakia amongst the Axis powers was not accepted by the Allied powers. Czechoslovakian military units took part in the war.

Greece
Greece was invaded by Italy on 28 October 1940 and subsequently joined the Allies. The Greek Army managed to stop the Italian offensive from Italy's protectorate of Albania, and Greek forces pushed Italian forces back into Albania. However, after the German invasion of Greece in April 1941, German forces managed to occupy mainland Greece and, a month later, the island of Crete . The Greek government went into exile , while the country was placed under a puppet government and divided into occupation zones run by Italy, Germany and Bulgaria. From 1942, a strong Resistance movement appeared, chiefly in the mountainous interior, where it established a "Free Greece" by mid-1943. Following the Italian capitulation in September 1943, the Italian zone was taken over by the Germans. Axis forces left mainland Greece in October 1944, although some Aegean islands, notably Crete, remained under German occupation until the end of the war.

Luxembourg
Free Luxembourgish Forces and the Government in Exile
Before the war, Luxembourg had pursued a policy of neutrality and only became an Allied member after being invaded by Germany on 10 May 1940. The Government in Exile fled, winding up in England. It made Luxembourgish language broadcasts to the occupied country on BBC radio . [44] In 1944, the government in exile signed a treaty with the Belgian and Dutch governments, creating the Benelux Economic Union and also signed into the Bretton Woods system .

Mexico
Mexico declared war on Germany in 1942 after German submarines attacked the Mexican oil tankers Potrero del Llano and Faja de Oro that were transporting crude oil to the United States . These attacks prompted President Manuel Ávila Camacho to declare war on the Axis powers.
Mexico formed Escuadrón 201 fighter squadron as part of the Fuerza Aérea Expedicionaria Mexicana (FAEM—"Mexican Expeditionary Air Force"). The squadron was attached to the 58th Fighter Group of the United States Army Air Forces and carried out tactical air support missions during the liberation of the main Philippine island of Luzon in the summer of 1945. [45]
Some 300,000 Mexican citizens went to the United States to work on farms and factories. Some 15,000 US nationals of Mexican origin and Mexican residents in the US enrolled in the US Armed Forces and fought in various fronts around the world. [46]

Netherlands
The Netherlands became an Allied member after being invaded on 10 May 1940 by Germany. During the ensuing campaign , the Netherlands were defeated and occupied by Germany. The Netherlands was liberated by Canadian, British, American and other allied forces during the campaigns of 1944 and 1945. The Princess Irene Brigade , formed from escapees from the German invasion, took part in several actions in 1944 in Arromanches and in 1945 in the Netherlands. Navy vessels saw action in the British Channel, the North Sea and the Mediterranean, generally as part of Royal Navy units. Dutch airmen flying British aircraft participated in the air war over Germany.

Colonies and dependencies
The Dutch East Indies (modern-day Indonesia ) was the principal Dutch colony in Asia, and was attacked by Japan in 1942. During the Dutch East Indies Campaign , the Netherlands played a significant role in the Allied effort to halt the Japanese advance as part of the American-British-Dutch-Australian (ABDA) Command . The ABDA fleet finally encountered the Japanese surface fleet at the Battle of Java Sea , at which Doorman gave the order to engage. During the ensuing battle the ABDA fleet suffered heavy losses, and was mostly destroyed after several naval battles around Java ; the ABDA Command was later dissolved. The Japanese finally occupied the Dutch East Indies in February–March 1942. Dutch troops, aircraft and escaped ships continued to fight on the Allied side and also mounted a guerrilla campaign in Timor .

New Zealand
New Zealand was a sovereign Dominion under the New Zealand monarchy , as per the Statue of Westminster 1931. It quickly entered World War II, officially declaring war on Germany on 3 September 1939, just hours after Britain. [47] Unlike Australia, which had felt obligated to declare war, as it also had not ratified the Statute of Westminster, New Zealand did so as a sign of allegiance to Britain, and in recognition of Britain's abandonment of its former appeasement policy, which New Zealand had long opposed. This led to then Prime Minister Michael Joseph Savage declaring two days later:

Norway
Because of its strategic location for control of the sea lanes in the North Sea and the Atlantic , both the Allies and Germany worried about the other side gaining control of the neutral country. Germany ultimately struck first with operation Weserübung on 9 April 1940, resulting in the two-month-long Norwegian Campaign , which ended in a German victory and their war-long occupation of Norway .
Units of the Norwegian Armed Forces evacuated from Norway or raised abroad continued participating in the war from exile .
The Norwegian merchant fleet, then the fourth largest in the world, was organized into Nortraship to support the Allied cause. Nortraship was the world's largest shipping company, and at its height operated more than 1000 ships.

Poland
The invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939, started the war in Europe, and the United Kingdom and France declared war on Germany on 3 September. Poland fielded the third biggest army [49] among the European Allies, after the Soviet Union and United Kingdom, but before France. The country never officially surrendered to the Third Reich , nor to the Soviet Union , primarily because neither of the totalitarian powers requested an official surrender, and continued the war effort under the Polish government in exile . However, the Soviet Union unilaterally considered the flight to Romania of President Ignacy Mościcki and Marshal Edward Rydz-Śmigły on 17 September as an evidence of debellatio causing the extinction of Polish State, and consequently declared itself allowed to invade (according to Soviet position: "to protect") Eastern Poland starting from the same day. [50] It must be noted that the Red Army had invaded the Second Polish Republic several hours before Polish president fled to Romania. The Soviets invaded on 17 September at 3 a.m.,l [51] while president Mościcki crossed the Polish-Romanian border at 21:45 on the same day. [52] The Polish military continued to fight, and the last major battle of the war, the battle of Kock , ended at 1 a.m. on 6 October 1939 with the Independent Operational Group "Polesie," a field army, surrendering due to lack of ammunition.
Polish soldiers fought under their own flag but under the command of the British military. They were major contributors to the allies in the theatre of war west of Germany and in the theatre of war east of Germany, with the Soviet Union. The Polish armed forces in the West created after the fall of Poland played minor roles in the Battle of France , and important ones in the Italian and North African Campaigns . [53] The Polish People's Army took part in the Battle of Berlin , the closing battle of the European theater of war. They occupied the city alongside the Soviet Red Army .
Home Army , the largest underground force in Europe, and other resistance organizations in occupied Poland provided intelligence that enabled successful operations later in the war and led to uncovering of Nazi war crimes (i.e., death camps ) to the Western Allies. Notable Polish units fought in every campaign in North Africa and Europe (outside the Balkans). The Soviet Union recognized the London-based government at first. But it broke diplomatic relations after the Katyn massacre of Polish nationals was revealed. In 1943, the Soviet Union organized the Polish People's Army under Zygmunt Berling , around which it constructed the post-war successor state People's Republic of Poland .

Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea
The Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea was established on April 13th, 1919. During the time when the Provisional Government was created, Korea was under the Japanese rule. The Provisional Government had governmental tasks and created important organizations for their independence movement, such as the Korean Liberation Army (KLA) on September 17th, 1940. The Provisional Government also declared war against the Empire of Japan on December 10th, 1941. The Provisional Government is also the first democratic government of Korea .
The KLA participated in the battles ongoing in China with the Kuomintang forces. In 1943, KLA underground activists, cooperating with British forces in Burma and India , initiated joint operations with British forces.
The KLA failed to initiate Operation Eagle, a plan to liberate the Korean Peninsula by first attacking the capital region ( Seoul and Incheon ), on August 18th, 1945. The Office of Strategic Services of the United States also promised to assist the KLA with warplanes, submarines, and airborne troops during the operation. However, the plan failed due to the early surrender of Japan on August 15th, 1945. The Provisional Government also faced heavy oppositions against the United States Army Military Government in Korea after World War II . In addition, other governments in the Treaty of San Francisco did not recognize the Provisional Government as the member of the allies. The government of the Republic of Korea was established on August 15th, 1948, under President Syngman Rhee , and the Provisional Government was disbanded officially.

South Africa
South Africa was a sovereign Dominion under the South African monarchy , as per the Statue of Westminster 1931. South Africa held authority over the mandate of South-West Africa .

Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia entered the war on the Allied side after the invasion of Axis powers on 6 April 1941. Royal Yugoslav Army was thoroughly defeated in less than two weeks and the country was occupied. The Italian-backed Croatian fascist leader Ante Pavelić declared the Independent State of Croatia before the invasion was over. King Peter II and much of the Yugoslavian government had left the country. In the United Kingdom , they joined numerous other governments in exile from Nazi-occupied Europe. Beginning with the uprising in Herzegovina in June 1941 , there was continuous anti-Axis resistance in Yugoslavia until the end of the war.

Resistance Factions
Before the end of 1941, the anti-Axis resistance movement split between the royalist Chetniks and the communist Yugoslav Partisans of Josip Broz Tito who fought both against each other during the war and against the occupying forces. The Yugoslav Partisans managed to put up considerable resistance to the Axis occupation, forming various liberated territories during the war. In August 1943, there were over 30 Axis divisions on the territory of Yugoslavia, not including the forces of the Croatian puppet state and other quisling formations. [54] In 1944, the leading Allied powers persuaded Tito's Yugoslav Partisans and the royalist Yugoslav government led by Prime Minister Ivan Šubašić to sign the Treaty of Vis that created Democratic Federal Yugoslavia .

Partisans
The Partisans were a major Yugoslav resistance movement against the Axis occupation and partition of Yugoslavia. Initially the Partisans were in rivalry with the Chetniks over control of the resistance movement. However, the Partisans were recognized by both the Eastern and Western Allies as the primary resistance movement in 1943. After that, their strength increased rapidly, from 100,000 at the beginning of 1943 to over 648,000 in September 1944. In 1945 they were transformed into Yugoslav army , organized in 4 field armies with 800,000 [55] fighters.

Chetniks
The Chetniks, the short name given to the movement titled the Yugoslav Army of the Fatherland , were initially a major Allied Yugoslav resistance movement. However, due to their royalist and anti-communist views, Chetniks were considered to have begun collaborating with the Axis as a tactical move to focus on destroying their Partisan rivals. The Chetniks presented themselves as a Yugoslav movement, but were primarily a Serb movement. They reached their peak in 1943 with 93,000 fighters. [56] Their major contribution was Operation Halyard in 1944. In collaboration with the OSS , 413 Allied airmen shot down over Yugoslavia were rescued and evacuated.

Client states

British

Egypt
The Kingdom of Egypt was nominally an independent state since 1922 but effectively remained in a British sphere of influence with the British Mediterranean fleet being stationed in Alexandria and British army forces being stationed in the Suez Canal zone. Egypt faced an Axis campaign led by Italian and German forces during the war. Frustration by the UK over Egypt's King Farouk's rule resulted in the Abdeen Palace Incident of 1942 where British army forces surrounded the Abdeen palace, a residence of King Farouk, demanding a new government be established, that nearly forced the abdication of Farouk until he submitted to British demands.

British Raj (India)
At the outbreak of World War II, the Indian army numbered 205,000 men. Later during World War II the Indian Army became the largest all-volunteer force in history, rising to over 2.5 million men in size.[10] These forces included tank, artillery and airborne forces. Indian soldiers earned 30 Victoria Crosses during the Second World War. During the war it suffered 1,500,000 civilian casualties (more than the United Kingdom), mainly from the Bengal famine of 1943 and 87,000 military casualties (more than any Crown colony but fewer than the United Kingdom). The UK suffered 382,000 military casualties.

Iraq

Iran

Soviet

Bulgaria
After a period of neutrality, Bulgaria joined the Axis powers from 1941 to 1944. The Orthodox church and others convinced King Boris to not allow the Bulgarian Jews to be exported to concentration camps. The king died shortly afterwards, suspected of being poisoned after a visit to Germany. Bulgaria abandoned the Axis and joined the Allies when the Soviet Union invaded, offering no resistance to the incoming forces. In the 1947 peace treaties, Bulgaria gained a small area near the Black Sea from Romania, making it the only former German ally to gain territory from WWII.

Mongolia
Mongolia fought against Japan during Battles of Khalkhin Gol in 1939 and the Soviet–Japanese War in August 1945 to protect its independence and to liberate Southern Mongolia from Japan and China . Mongolia had been a Soviet sphere of influence since the 1920s.

Poland (Gomułka regime)
By 1944, Poland entered the Soviet sphere of influence with Władysław Gomułka forming a communist government. Polish forces fought alongside Soviet forces against Germany.

Romania
Romania had initially been a member of the Axis powers but switched allegiance upon facing invasion by the Soviet Union. In a radio broadcast to the Romanian people and army on the night of 23 August 1944 King Michael issued a cease-fire, [57] proclaimed Romania's loyalty to the Allies, announced the acceptance of an armistice (to be signed on 12 September) [58] offered by Great Britain , the United States , and the USSR , and declared war on Germany. [59] The coup accelerated the Red Army 's advance into Romania, but did not avert a rapid Soviet occupation and capture of about 130,000 Romanian soldiers, who were transported to the Soviet Union where many perished in prison camps. The armistice was signed three weeks later on 12 September 1944, on terms virtually dictated by the Soviet Union. [57] Under the terms of the armistice, Romania announced its unconditional surrender [60] to the USSR and was placed under occupation of the Allied forces with the Soviet Union as their representative, in control of media, communication, post, and civil administration behind the front. [57]

Tannu Tuva
Tannu Tuva was a partially recognized state founded from the former Tuvan protectorate of Imperial Russia. It was a client state of the Soviet Union and was annexed into the Soviet Union in 1944.

Co-belligerent state combatants

Italy
Italy initially had been a leading member of the Axis powers, however after facing multiple military losses including the loss of all of Italy's colonies to advancing Allied forces, Duce Benito Mussolini was deposed and arrested in July 1943 by order of King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy in co-operation with members of the Grand Council of Fascism who viewed Mussolini as having led Italy to ruin by allying with Germany in the war. Victor Emmanuel III dismantled the remaining apparatus of the Fascist regime and appointed Field Marshal Pietro Badoglio as Prime Minister of Italy . On 8 September 1943, Italy signed the Armistice of Cassibile with the Allies, ending Italy's war with the Allies and ending Italy's participation with the Axis powers. Expecting immediate German retaliation, Victor Emmanuel III and the Italian government relocated to southern Italy under Allied control. Germany viewed the Italian government's actions as an act of betrayal, and German forces immediately occupied all Italian territories outside of Allied control, [61] in some cases even massacring Italian troops.
Italy became a co-belligerent of the Allies, and the Italian Co-Belligerent Army was created to fight against the German occupation of Northern Italy, where German paratroopers rescued Mussolini from arrest and he was placed in charge of a German puppet state known as the Italian Social Republic (RSI). Italy descended into civil war until the end of hostilities after his deposition and arrest, with Fascists loyal to him allying with German forces and helping them against the Italian armistice government and partisans . [62]

Associated power

Albania
Albania was recognized as an "Associated Power" at the 1946 Paris conference [63] and officially signed the treaty ending WWII between the "Allied and Associated Powers" and Italy in Paris, on 10 February 1947. [64] [65]

United Nations

Declaration by United Nations
The alliance was formalised in the Declaration by United Nations on 1 January 1942. There were 26 signatories:

Alliance growing
The United Nations began growing immediately after their formation. In 1942, Mexico, the Philippines and Ethiopia adhered to the declaration. The African nation had been restored in its independence by British forces after the Italian defeat on Amba Alagi in 1941, while the Philippines, still dependent on Washington but granted international diplomatic recognition, was allowed to join on 10 June despite their occupation by Japan.
During 1943, the Declaration was signed by Iraq, Iran, Brazil, Bolivia and Colombia. A Tripartite Treaty of Alliance with Britain and USSR formalised Iran 's assistance to the Allies. [66] In Rio de Janeiro , Brazilian dictator Getúlio Vargas was considered near to fascist ideas, but realistically joined the United Nations after their evident successes.
In 1944, Liberia and France signed. The French situation was very confused. Free French forces were recognized only by Britain, while the United States considered Vichy France to be the legal government of the country until Operation Overlord , while also preparing US occupation francs . Winston Churchill urged Roosevelt to restore France to its status of a major Power after the liberation of Paris in August 1944; the Prime Minister feared that after the war, Britain could remain the sole great Power in Europe facing the Communist threat, as it was in 1940 and 1941 against Nazism.
During the early part of 1945, Peru, Chile, Paraguay, Venezuela, Uruguay, Turkey, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Syria (these latter two French colonies had been declared independent nations by British occupation troops, despite big protests by Pétain before, and De Gaulle after) and Ecuador became signatories. Ukraine and Belarus , which were not independent nations but parts of the Soviet Union, were accepted as members of the United Nations as way to provide greater influence to Stalin, who had only Yugoslavia as a communist partner in the alliance.

Charter of the United Nations
The Charter of the United Nations was agreed to during the war at the United Nations Conference on International Organization , held between April and July 1945. The Charter was signed by 50 nations on 26 June (Poland had its place reserved and later became the 51st "original" signatory) [ citation needed ] , and was formally ratified shortly after the war on 24 October 1945. In 1944, the United Nations was formulated and negotiated among the delegations from the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States and China at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference [67] [68] where the formation and the permanent seats (for the "Big Five", China, France, the UK, USA and USSR) of the United Nations Security Council were decided. The Security Council met for the first time in the immediate aftermath of war on 17 January 1946. [69]
These are the original 51 signatories (UNSC permanent members are asterisked):

Timeline of nations entering war on the Axis Powers
The following list denotes dates on which nations declared war on Axis powers, or on which an Axis power declared war on them. Nepal was formally independent. [ citation needed ] Indian Empire had a status less independent than the Dominions. [70]

1939

1940

1941

Provisional governments or governments-in exile that declared war against the Axis in 1941

1942

1943

1944

1945

See also

Footnotes

Bibliography

External links
WebPage index: 00005
Nazi Germany
Nazi Germany is the common English name for the period in German history from 1933 to 1945, when Germany was governed by a dictatorship under the control of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party (NSDAP). Under Hitler's rule, Germany was transformed into a fascist state in which the Nazi Party took totalitarian control over nearly all aspects of life. The official name of the state was Deutsches Reich from 1933 to 1943 and Großdeutsches Reich ("Greater German Reich") from 1943 to 1945. The period is also known under the names the Third Reich ( German : Drittes Reich ) and the National Socialist Period ( German : Zeit des Nationalsozialismus , abbreviated as NS-Zeit ). The Nazi regime came to an end after the Allied Powers defeated Germany in May 1945, ending World War II in Europe .
Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany by the President of the Weimar Republic Paul von Hindenburg on 30 January 1933. The Nazi Party then began to eliminate all political opposition and consolidate its power. Hindenburg died on 2 August 1934, and Hitler became dictator of Germany by merging the powers and offices of the Chancellery and Presidency. A national referendum held 19 August 1934 confirmed Hitler as sole Führer (leader) of Germany. All power was centralised in Hitler's person, and his word became above all laws. The government was not a coordinated, co-operating body, but a collection of factions struggling for power and Hitler's favour. In the midst of the Great Depression , the Nazis restored economic stability and ended mass unemployment using heavy military spending and a mixed economy . Extensive public works were undertaken, including the construction of Autobahnen (motorways). The return to economic stability boosted the regime's popularity.
Racism, especially antisemitism , was a central feature of the regime. The Germanic peoples (the Nordic race ) were considered by the Nazis to be the purest branch of the Aryan race , and were therefore viewed as the master race . Millions of Jews and other peoples deemed undesirable by the state were murdered in the Holocaust . Opposition to Hitler's rule was ruthlessly suppressed. Members of the liberal, socialist, and communist opposition were killed, imprisoned, or exiled. The Christian churches were also oppressed, with many leaders imprisoned. Education focused on racial biology , population policy, and fitness for military service. Career and educational opportunities for women were curtailed . Recreation and tourism were organised via the Strength Through Joy program, and the 1936 Summer Olympics showcased the Third Reich on the international stage. Propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels made effective use of film, mass rallies, and Hitler's hypnotic oratory to control public opinion. The government controlled artistic expression, promoting specific art forms and banning or discouraging others.
Beginning in the late 1930s, Nazi Germany made increasingly aggressive territorial demands, threatening war if they were not met. It seized Austria and Czechoslovakia in 1938 and 1939. Hitler made a non-aggression pact with Joseph Stalin and invaded Poland in September 1939, launching World War II in Europe. In alliance with Italy and smaller Axis powers , Germany conquered most of Europe by 1940 and threatened Great Britain. Reichskommissariats took control of conquered areas, and a German administration was established in what was left of Poland. Jews and others deemed undesirable were imprisoned, murdered in Nazi concentration camps and extermination camps , or shot.
Following the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, the tide gradually turned against the Nazis, who suffered major military defeats in 1943. Large-scale aerial bombing of Germany escalated in 1944, and the Axis powers were pushed back in Eastern and Southern Europe. Following the Allied invasion of France , Germany was conquered by the Soviet Union from the east and the other Allied powers from the west and capitulated within a year. Hitler's refusal to admit defeat led to massive destruction of German infrastructure and additional war-related deaths in the closing months of the war. The victorious Allies initiated a policy of denazification and put many of the surviving Nazi leadership on trial for war crimes at the Nuremberg trials .

Name
The official name of the state was Deutsches Reich from 1933 to 1943, and Großdeutsches Reich from 1943 to 1945.
Common English terms are "Nazi Germany" and "Third Reich". The latter, adopted by Nazi propaganda, was first used in a 1923 book by Arthur Moeller van den Bruck . The book counted the Holy Roman Empire (962–1806) as the first Reich and the German Empire (1871–1918) as the second. [2] The Nazis used it to legitimize their regime as a successor state. After they seized power, Nazi propaganda retroactively referred to the Weimar Republic as the Zwischenreich ("Interim Reich").

Background
The German economy suffered severe setbacks after the end of World War I, partly because of reparations payments required under the 1919 Treaty of Versailles . The government printed money to make the payments and to repay the country's war debt; the resulting hyperinflation led to inflated prices for consumer goods, economic chaos, and food riots. [3] When the government failed to make the reparations payments in January 1923, French troops occupied German industrial areas along the Ruhr . Widespread civil unrest followed. [4]
The National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP; [d] Nazi Party) was the renamed successor of the German Workers' Party founded in 1919, one of several far-right political parties active in Germany at the time. [5] The party platform included removal of the Weimar Republic, rejection of the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, radical antisemitism , and anti- Bolshevism . [6] They promised a strong central government, increased Lebensraum (living space) for Germanic peoples, formation of a national community based on race, and racial cleansing via the active suppression of Jews , who would be stripped of their citizenship and civil rights. [7] The Nazis proposed national and cultural renewal based upon the Völkisch movement . [8]
When the stock market in the United States crashed on 24 October 1929 , the effect in Germany was dire. Millions were thrown out of work, and several major banks collapsed. Hitler and the NSDAP prepared to take advantage of the emergency to gain support for their party. They promised to strengthen the economy and provide jobs. [9] Many voters decided the NSDAP was capable of restoring order, quelling civil unrest, and improving Germany's international reputation. After the federal election of 1932 , the Nazis were the largest party in the Reichstag , holding 230 seats with 37.4 percent of the popular vote. [10]

History

Nazi seizure of power
Although the Nazis won the greatest share of the popular vote in the two Reichstag general elections of 1932, they did not have a majority, so Hitler led a short-lived coalition government formed by the NSDAP and the German National People's Party . [11] Under pressure from politicians, industrialists, and the business community, President Paul von Hindenburg appointed Hitler as Chancellor of Germany on 30 January 1933. This event is known as the Machtergreifung (seizure of power). [12] In the following months, the NSDAP used a process termed Gleichschaltung (co-ordination) to rapidly bring all aspects of life under control of the party. [13] All civilian organisations, including agricultural groups, volunteer organisations, and sports clubs, had their leadership replaced with Nazi sympathisers or party members. By June 1933, virtually the only organisations not in the control of the NSDAP were the army and the churches. [14]
On the night of 27 February 1933, the Reichstag building was set afire ; Marinus van der Lubbe , a Dutch communist, was found guilty of starting the blaze. Hitler proclaimed that the arson marked the start of a communist uprising. Violent suppression of communists by the Sturmabteilung (SA) was undertaken all over the country, and four thousand members of the Communist Party of Germany were arrested. The Reichstag Fire Decree , imposed on 28 February 1933, rescinded most German civil liberties, including rights of assembly and freedom of the press. The decree also allowed the police to detain people indefinitely without charges or a court order. The legislation was accompanied by a propaganda blitz that led to public support for the measure. [15]
In March 1933, the Enabling Act , an amendment to the Weimar Constitution , passed in the Reichstag by a vote of 444 to 94. [16] This amendment allowed Hitler and his cabinet to pass laws—even laws that violated the constitution—without the consent of the president or the Reichstag. [17] As the bill required a two-thirds majority to pass, the Nazis used the provisions of the Reichstag Fire Decree to keep several Social Democratic deputies from attending; the Communists had already been banned. [18] [19] On 10 May the government seized the assets of the Social Democrats; they were banned in June. [20] The remaining political parties were dissolved, and on 14 July 1933, Germany became a de facto one-party state when the founding of new parties was made illegal. [21] Further elections in November 1933 , 1936 , and 1938 were entirely Nazi-controlled and saw only the Nazis and a small number of independents elected. [22] The regional state parliaments and the Reichsrat (federal upper house) were abolished in January 1934. [23]
The Nazi regime abolished the symbols of the Weimar Republic, including the black, red, and gold tricolour flag, and adopted reworked imperial symbolism. The previous imperial black, white, and red tricolour was restored as one of Germany's two official flags; the second was the swastika flag of the NSDAP, which became the sole national flag in 1935. The NSDAP anthem " Horst-Wessel-Lied " ("Horst Wessel Song") became a second national anthem. [24]
In this period, Germany was still in a dire economic situation; millions were unemployed and the balance of trade deficit was daunting. [25] Hitler knew that reviving the economy was vital. In 1934, using deficit spending, public works projects were undertaken. A total of 1.7 million Germans were put to work on the projects in 1934 alone. [25] Average wages both per hour and per week began to rise. [26]
The demands of the SA for more political and military power caused anxiety among military, industrial, and political leaders. In response, Hitler purged the entire SA leadership in the Night of the Long Knives , which took place from 30 June to 2 July 1934. [27] Hitler targeted Ernst Röhm and other SA leaders who, along with a number of Hitler's political adversaries (such as Gregor Strasser and former chancellor Kurt von Schleicher ), were rounded up, arrested, and shot. [28]
On 2 August 1934, President von Hindenburg died. The previous day, the cabinet had enacted the "Law Concerning the Highest State Office of the Reich", which stated that upon Hindenburg's death, the office of president would be abolished and its powers merged with those of the chancellor. [29] Hitler thus became head of state as well as head of government. He was formally named as Führer und Reichskanzler (leader and chancellor). Germany was now a totalitarian state with Hitler at its head. [30] As head of state, Hitler became Supreme Commander of the armed forces. The new law altered the traditional loyalty oath of servicemen so that they affirmed loyalty to Hitler personally rather than the office of supreme commander or the state. [31] On 19 August, the merger of the presidency with the chancellorship was approved by 90 percent of the electorate in a plebiscite . [32]
Most Germans were relieved that the conflicts and street fighting of the Weimar era had ended. They were deluged with propaganda orchestrated by Joseph Goebbels , who promised peace and plenty for all in a united, Marxist-free country without the constraints of the Versailles Treaty. [33] The first Nazi concentration camp , initially for political prisoners, was opened at Dachau in 1933. [34] Hundreds of camps of varying size and function were created by the end of the war. [35] Upon seizing power, the Nazis took repressive measures against their political opposition and rapidly began the comprehensive marginalisation of persons they considered socially undesirable. Under the guise of combating the Communist threat, the National Socialists secured immense power. Above all, their campaign against Jews living in Germany gained momentum.
Beginning in April 1933, scores of measures defining the status of Jews and their rights were instituted at the regional and national level. [36] Initiatives and legal mandates against the Jews reached their culmination with the establishment of the Nuremberg Laws of 1935, stripping them of their basic rights. [37] The Nazis would take from the Jews their wealth, their right to intermarry with non-Jews, and their right to occupy many fields of labour (such as practising law, medicine, or working as educators). They eventually declared them undesirable to remain among German citizens and society, which over time dehumanised the Jews; arguably, these actions desensitised Germans to the extent that it resulted in the Holocaust . Ethnic Germans who refused to ostracise Jews or who showed any signs of resistance to Nazi propaganda were placed under surveillance by the Gestapo , had their rights removed, or were sent to concentration camps. [38] Everyone and everything was monitored in Nazi Germany. Inaugurating and legitimising power for the Nazis was thus accomplished by their initial revolutionary activities, then through the improvisation and manipulation of the legal mechanisms available, through the use of police powers by the Nazi Party (which allowed them to include and exclude from society whomever they chose), and finally by the expansion of authority for all state and federal institutions. [39]

Militaristic foreign policy
As early as February 1933, Hitler announced that rearmament must be undertaken, albeit clandestinely at first, as to do so was in violation of the Versailles Treaty. A year later he told his military leaders that 1942 was the target date for going to war in the east. [40] He pulled Germany out of the League of Nations in 1933, claiming its disarmament clauses were unfair, as they applied only to Germany. [41] The Saarland , which had been placed under League of Nations supervision for 15 years at the end of World War I, voted in January 1935 to become part of Germany. [42] In March 1935 Hitler announced that the Reichswehr would be increased to 550,000 men and that he was creating an air force. [43] Britain agreed that the Germans would be allowed to build a naval fleet with the signing of the Anglo-German Naval Agreement on 18 June 1935. [44]
When the Italian invasion of Ethiopia led to only mild protests by the British and French governments, on 7 March 1936 Hitler used the Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance as a pretext to order the Wehrmacht Heer ground forces to march 3,000 troops into the demilitarised zone in the Rhineland in violation of the Versailles Treaty. [45] As the territory was part of Germany, the British and French governments did not feel that attempting to enforce the treaty was worth the risk of war. [46] In the one-party election held on 29 March, the NSDAP received 98.9 percent support. [46] In 1936 Hitler signed an Anti-Comintern Pact with Japan and a non-aggression agreement with the Fascist Italy of Benito Mussolini , who was soon referring to a "Rome-Berlin Axis". [47]
Hitler sent air and armoured units to assist General Francisco Franco and his Nationalist forces in the Spanish Civil War , which broke out in July 1936. The Soviet Union sent a smaller force to assist the Republican government . Franco's Nationalists were victorious in 1939 and became an informal ally of Nazi Germany. [48]

Austria and Czechoslovakia
In February 1938, Hitler emphasised to Austrian Chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg the need for Germany to secure its frontiers. Schuschnigg scheduled a plebiscite regarding Austrian independence for 13 March, but Hitler demanded that it be cancelled. On 11 March, Hitler sent an ultimatum to Schuschnigg demanding that he hand over all power to the Austrian NSDAP or face an invasion. The Wehrmacht entered Austria the next day, to be greeted with enthusiasm by the populace. [49]
The Republic of Czechoslovakia was home to a substantial minority of Germans, who lived mostly in the Sudetenland . Under pressure from separatist groups within the Sudeten German Party , the Czechoslovak government offered economic concessions to the region. [50] Hitler decided to incorporate not just the Sudetenland but the whole of Czechoslovakia into the Reich. [51] The Nazis undertook a propaganda campaign to try to drum up support for an invasion. [52] Top leaders of the armed forces were not in favour of the plan, as Germany was not yet ready for war. [53] The crisis led to war preparations by the British, the Czechoslovaks, and France (Czechoslovakia's ally). Attempting to avoid war, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain arranged a series of meetings, the result of which was the Munich Agreement , signed on 29 September 1938. The Czechoslovak government was forced to accept the Sudetenland's annexation into Germany. Chamberlain was greeted with cheers when he landed in London bringing, he said, "peace for our time." [54] The agreement lasted six months before Hitler seized the rest of Czech territory in March 1939. [55] A puppet state was created in Slovakia . [56]
Austrian and Czech foreign exchange reserves were soon seized by the Nazis, as were stockpiles of raw materials such as metals and completed goods such as weaponry and aircraft, which were shipped back to Germany. The Reichswerke Hermann Göring industrial conglomerate took control of steel and coal production facilities in both countries. [57]

Poland
In January 1934 Germany signed a non-aggression pact with Poland, which disrupted the French network of anti-German alliances in Eastern Europe. [58] In March 1939, Hitler demanded the return of the Free City of Danzig and the Polish Corridor , a strip of land that separated East Prussia from the rest of Germany. The British announced they would come to the aid of Poland if it was attacked. Hitler, believing the British would not actually take action, ordered an invasion plan should be readied for a target date of September 1939. [59] On 23 May he described to his generals his overall plan of not only seizing the Polish Corridor but greatly expanding German territory eastward at the expense of Poland. He expected this time they would be met by force. [60]
The Germans reaffirmed their alliance with Italy and signed non-aggression pacts with Denmark, Estonia, and Latvia. Trade links were formalised with Romania, Norway, and Sweden. [61] Hitler's foreign minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop , arranged in negotiations with the Soviet Union a non-aggression pact, the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact , which was signed in August 1939. [62] The treaty also contained secret protocols dividing Poland and the Baltic states into German and Soviet spheres of influence. [63] [64]

World War II

Foreign policy
Germany's foreign policy during the war involved the creation of allied governments under direct or indirect control from Berlin. A main goal was obtaining soldiers from the senior allies, such as Italy and Hungary, and millions of workers and ample food supplies from subservient allies such as Vichy France . [65] By the fall of 1942, there were 24 divisions from Romania on the Eastern Front, 10 from Italy, and 10 from Hungary. [66] When a country was no longer dependable, Germany assumed full control, as it did with France in 1942, Italy in 1943, and Hungary in 1944. Although Japan was an official powerful ally, the relationship was distant and there was little co-ordination or co-operation. For example, Germany refused to share their formula for synthetic oil from coal until late in the war. [67]

Outbreak of war
Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939. Britain and France declared war on Germany two days later. World War II was under way. [68] Poland fell quickly, as the Soviet Union attacked from the east on 17 September. [69] Reinhard Heydrich , then head of the Gestapo, ordered on 21 September that Jews should be rounded up and concentrated into cities with good rail links. Initially the intention was to deport the Jews to points further east, or possibly to Madagascar . [70] Using lists prepared ahead of time, some 65,000 Polish intelligentsia, noblemen, clergy, and teachers were killed by the end of 1939 in an attempt to destroy Poland's identity as a nation. [71] [72] The Soviet forces continued to attack, advancing into Finland in the Winter War , and German forces were involved in action at sea. But little other activity occurred until May, so the period became known as the " Phoney War ". [73]
From the start of the war, a British blockade on shipments to Germany affected the Reich economy. The Germans were particularly dependent on foreign supplies of oil, coal, and grain. [74] To safeguard Swedish iron ore shipments to Germany, Hitler ordered an attack on Norway , which took place on 9 April 1940. Much of the country was occupied by German troops by the end of April. Also on 9 April, the Germans invaded and occupied Denmark . [75] [76]

Conquest of Europe
Against the judgement of many of his senior military officers, Hitler ordered an attack on France and the Low Countries , which began in May 1940. [77] They quickly conquered Luxembourg , the Netherlands , and Belgium , and France surrendered on 22 June. [78] The unexpectedly swift defeat of France resulted in an upswing in Hitler's popularity and a strong upsurge in war fever. [79]
In spite of the provisions of the Hague Convention , industrial firms in the Netherlands, France, and Belgium were put to work producing war materiel for the occupying German military. Officials viewed this option as being preferable to their citizens being deported to the Reich as forced labour. [80]
The Nazis seized from the French thousands of locomotives and rolling stock, stockpiles of weapons, and raw materials such as copper, tin, oil, and nickel. [81] Financial demands were levied on the governments of the occupied countries as well; payments for occupation costs were received from France, Belgium, and Norway. [82] Barriers to trade led to hoarding, black markets, and uncertainty about the future. [83] Food supplies were precarious; production dropped in most areas of Europe, but not as much as during World War I. [84] Greece experienced famine in the first year of occupation and the Netherlands in the last year of the war. [84]
Hitler made peace overtures to the new British leader, Winston Churchill , and upon their rejection he ordered a series of aerial attacks on Royal Air Force airbases and radar stations. However, the German Luftwaffe failed to defeat the Royal Air Force in what became known as the Battle of Britain . [85] By the end of October, Hitler realised the necessary air superiority for his planned invasion of Britain could not be achieved, and he ordered nightly air raids on British cities, including London, Plymouth , and Coventry . [86]
In February 1941, the German Afrika Korps arrived in Libya to aid the Italians in the North African Campaign and attempt to contain Commonwealth forces stationed in Egypt. [87] On 6 April, Germany launched the invasion of Yugoslavia and the battle of Greece . [88] German efforts to secure oil included negotiating a supply from their new ally, Romania , who signed the Tripartite Pact in November 1940. [89] [90]
On 22 June 1941, contravening the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, 5.5 million Axis troops attacked the Soviet Union. In addition to Hitler's stated purpose of acquiring Lebensraum , this large-scale offensive (codenamed Operation Barbarossa ) was intended to destroy the Soviet Union and seize its natural resources for subsequent aggression against the Western powers. [91] The reaction among Germans was one of surprise and trepidation. Many were concerned about how much longer the war would drag on or suspected that Germany could not win a war fought on two fronts. [92]
The invasion conquered a huge area, including the Baltic republics, Belarus , and West Ukraine . After the successful Battle of Smolensk , Hitler ordered Army Group Centre to halt its advance to Moscow and temporarily divert its Panzer groups to aid in the encirclement of Leningrad and Kiev . [93] This pause provided the Red Army with an opportunity to mobilise fresh reserves. The Moscow offensive, which resumed in October 1941, ended disastrously in December . [93] On 7 December 1941, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor , Hawaii. Four days later, Germany declared war on the United States. [94]
Food was in short supply in the conquered areas of the Soviet Union and Poland, with rations inadequate to meet nutritional needs. The retreating armies had burned the crops, and much of the remainder was sent back to the Reich. [95] In Germany itself, food rations had to be cut in 1942. In his role as Plenipotentiary of the Four Year Plan , Hermann Göring demanded increased shipments of grain from France and fish from Norway. The 1942 harvest was a good one, and food supplies remained adequate in Western Europe. [96]
Reichsleiter Rosenberg Taskforce was an organisation set up to loot artwork and cultural material from Jewish collections, libraries, and museums throughout Europe. Some 26,000 railroad cars full of art treasures, furniture, and other looted items were sent back to Germany from France alone. [97] In addition, soldiers looted or purchased goods such as produce and clothing—items which were becoming harder to obtain in Germany—for shipment back home. [98]

Turning point and collapse
Germany, and Europe as a whole, was almost totally dependent on foreign oil imports. [99] In an attempt to resolve the persistent shortage, Germany launched Fall Blau ( Case Blue ), an offensive against the Caucasian oilfields, in June 1942. [100] The Red Army launched a counter-offensive on 19 November and encircled the Axis forces, who were trapped in Stalingrad on 23 November. [101] Göring assured Hitler that the 6th Army could be supplied by air, but this turned out to be infeasible. [102] Hitler's refusal to allow a retreat led to the deaths of 200,000 German and Romanian soldiers; of the 91,000 men who surrendered in the city on 31 January 1943, only 6,000 survivors returned to Germany after the war. [103] Soviet forces continued to push the invaders westward after the failed German offensive at the Battle of Kursk , and by the end of 1943, the Germans had lost most of their territorial gains in the east. [104]
In Egypt, Field Marshal Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps were defeated by British forces under Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery in October 1942. [105] The Allies landed in Sicily in July 1943, and in Italy in September. [106] Meanwhile, American and British bomber fleets, based in Britain, began operations against Germany . In an effort to destroy German morale, many sorties were intentionally given civilian targets. [107] Soon German aircraft production could not keep pace with losses, and without air cover, the Allied bombing campaign became even more devastating. By targeting oil refineries and factories, they crippled the German war effort by late 1944. [108]
On 6 June 1944, American, British, and Canadian forces established a western front with the D-Day landings in Normandy . [109] On 20 July 1944, Hitler narrowly survived a bomb attack . [110] He ordered savage reprisals, resulting in 7,000 arrests and the execution of more than 4,900 people. [111] The failed Ardennes Offensive (16 December 1944 – 25 January 1945) was the last major German campaign of the war. Soviet forces entered Germany on 27 January. [112] Hitler's refusal to admit defeat and his repeated insistence that the war be fought to the last man led to unnecessary death and destruction in the closing months of the war. [113] Through his Justice Minister, Otto Georg Thierack , he ordered that anyone who was not prepared to fight should be summarily court-martialed. Thousands of people were put to death. [114] In many areas, people looked for ways to surrender to the approaching Allies, in spite of exhortations of local leaders to continue the struggle. Hitler also ordered the intentional destruction of transport, bridges, industries, and other infrastructure—a scorched earth decree—but Armaments Minister Albert Speer was able to keep this order from being fully carried out. [113]
During the Battle of Berlin (16 April 1945 – 2 May 1945), Hitler and his staff lived in the underground Führerbunker , while the Red Army approached. [115] On 30 April, when Soviet troops were one or two blocks away from the Reich Chancellery , Hitler and Eva Braun committed suicide in the Führerbunker . [116] On 2 May General Helmuth Weidling unconditionally surrendered Berlin to Soviet General Vasily Chuikov . [117] Hitler was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz as Reich President and Goebbels as Reich Chancellor. [118] Goebbels and his wife Magda committed suicide the next day, after murdering their six children . [119] On 4–8 May 1945 most of the remaining German armed forces surrendered unconditionally. The German Instrument of Surrender was signed 7 May, marking the end of World War II in Europe . [120]
Suicide rates in Germany increased as the war drew to a close, particularly in areas where the Red Army was advancing. More than a thousand people (out of a population of around 16,000) committed suicide in Demmin on and around 1 May 1945 as the 65th Army of 2nd Belorussian Front first broke into a distillery and then rampaged through the town, committing mass rapes, arbitrarily executing civilians, and setting fire to buildings. [121] High numbers of suicides took place in many other locations, including Neubrandenburg (600 dead), [121] Stolp in Pommern (1,000 dead), [121] and Berlin, where at least 7,057 people committed suicide in 1945. [122]

German casualties
Estimates of the total German war dead range from 5.5 to 6.9 million persons. [123] A study by German historian Rüdiger Overmans puts the number of German military dead and missing at 5.3 million, including 900,000 men conscripted from outside of Germany's 1937 borders, in Austria, and in east-central Europe. [124] Overy estimated in 2014 that in all about 353,000 civilians were killed by British and American bombing of German cities. [125] An additional 20,000 died in the land campaign. [126] [127] Some 22,000 citizens died during the Battle of Berlin. [128] Other civilian deaths include 300,000 Germans (including Jews) who were victims of Nazi political, racial, and religious persecution, [129] and 200,000 who were murdered in the Nazi euthanasia program. [130] Political courts called Sondergerichte sentenced some 12,000 members of the German resistance to death, and civil courts sentenced an additional 40,000 Germans. [131] Mass rapes of German women also took place. [132]
At the end of the war, Europe had more than 40 million refugees , [133] its economy had collapsed, and 70 percent of its industrial infrastructure was destroyed. [134] Between twelve and fourteen million ethnic Germans fled or were expelled from east-central Europe to Germany. [135] During the Cold War , the West German government estimated a death toll of 2.2 million civilians due to the flight and expulsion of Germans and through forced labour in the Soviet Union . [136] This figure remained unchallenged until the 1990s, when some historians put the death toll at 500,000–600,000 confirmed deaths. [137] [138] [139] In 2006 the German government reaffirmed its position that 2.0–2.5 million deaths occurred. [e]

Geography

Territorial changes
As a result of their defeat in World War I and the resulting Treaty of Versailles, Germany lost Alsace-Lorraine , Northern Schleswig , and Memel . The Saarland temporarily became a protectorate of France, under the condition that its residents would later decide by referendum which country to join. Poland became a separate nation and was given access to the sea by the creation of the Polish Corridor, which separated Prussia from the rest of Germany. Danzig was made a free city. [140]
Germany regained control of the Saarland via a referendum held in 1935 and annexed Austria in the Anschluss of 1938. [141] The Munich Agreement of 1938 gave Germany control of the Sudetenland, and they seized the remainder of Czechoslovakia six months later. [54] Under threat of invasion by sea, Lithuania surrendered the Memel district in March 1939. [142]
Between 1939 and 1941, German forces invaded Poland , France , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Belgium , and the Soviet Union . [78] Trieste , South Tyrol , and Istria were ceded to Germany by Mussolini in 1943. [143] Two puppet districts were set up in the area, the Operational Zone of the Adriatic Littoral and the Operational Zone of the Alpine Foothills . [144]

Occupied territories
Some of the conquered territories were immediately incorporated into Germany as part of Hitler's long-term goal of creating a Greater Germanic Reich . Several areas, such as Alsace-Lorraine, were placed under the authority of an adjacent Gau (regional district). Beyond the territories incorporated into Germany were the Reichskommissariate (Reich Commissariats), quasi-colonial regimes established in a number of occupied countries. Areas placed under German administration included the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia , Reichskommissariat Ostland (encompassing the Baltic states and Belarus), and Reichskommissariat Ukraine . Conquered areas of Belgium and France were placed under control of the Military Administration in Belgium and Northern France . [146] Belgian Eupen-Malmedy , which had been part of German until 1919, was annexed directly. Part of Poland was immediately incorporated into the Reich, and the General Government was established in occupied central Poland. [147] Hitler intended to eventually incorporate many of these areas into the Reich. [148]
The governments of Denmark, Norway ( Reichskommissariat Norwegen ), and the Netherlands ( Reichskommissariat Niederlande ) were placed under civilian administrations staffed largely by natives. [146] [f]

Post-war changes
With the issuance of the Berlin Declaration on 5 June 1945 and later creation of the Allied Control Council , the four Allied powers temporarily assumed governance of Germany. [149] At the Potsdam Conference in August 1945, the Allies arranged for the Allied occupation and denazification of the country. Germany was split into four zones, each occupied by one of the Allied powers, who drew reparations from their zone. Since most of the industrial areas were in the western zones, the Soviet Union was transferred additional reparations. [150] The Allied Control Council disestablished Prussia on 20 May 1947. [151] Aid to Germany began arriving from the United States under the Marshall Plan in 1948. [152] The occupation lasted until 1949, when the countries of East Germany and West Germany were created. Germany finalised her border with Poland by signing the Treaty of Warsaw (1970) . [153] Germany remained divided until 1990, when the Allies renounced all claims to German territory with the Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany , under which Germany also renounced claims to territories lost during World War II. [154]

Politics

Ideology
The NSDAP was a far-right political party which came into its own during the social and financial upheavals that occurred with the onset of the Great Depression in 1929. [155] While in prison after the failed Beer Hall Putsch of 1923, Hitler wrote Mein Kampf , which laid out his plan for transforming German society into one based on race. [156] The ideology of Nazism brought together elements of antisemitism, racial hygiene , and eugenics , and combined them with pan-Germanism and territorial expansionism with the goal of obtaining more Lebensraum for the Germanic people. [157] The regime attempted to obtain this new territory by attacking Poland and the Soviet Union, intending to deport or kill the Jews and Slavs living there, who were viewed as being inferior to the Aryan master race and part of a Jewish Bolshevik conspiracy. [158] [159] The Nazi regime believed that only Germany could defeat the forces of Bolshevism and save humanity from world domination by International Jewry . [160] Others deemed life unworthy of life by the Nazis included the mentally and physically disabled, Romani people , homosexuals , Jehovah's Witnesses , and social misfits. [161] [162]
Influenced by the Völkisch movement, the regime was against cultural modernism and supported the development of an extensive military at the expense of intellectualism. [8] [163] Creativity and art were stifled, except where they could serve as propaganda media. [164] The party used symbols such as the Blood Flag and rituals such as the Nazi Party rallies to foster unity and bolster the regime's popularity. [165]

Government
Successive Reichsstatthalter decrees between 1933 and 1935 effectively abolished the existing Länder ( constituent states ) of Germany and replaced them with new administrative divisions , the Gaue , headed by NSDAP leaders ( Gauleiters ), who effectively became the governor of their respective regions. [166] The change was never fully implemented, as the Länder were still used as administrative divisions for some government departments such as education. This led to a bureaucratic tangle of overlapping jurisdictions and responsibilities typical of the administrative style of the Nazi regime. [167]
Jewish civil servants lost their jobs in 1933, except for those who had seen military service in World War I. Members of the NSDAP or party supporters were appointed in their place. [168] As part of the process of Gleichschaltung , the Reich Local Government Law of 1935 abolished local elections. From that point forward, mayors were appointed by the Ministry of the Interior. [169]
Hitler ruled Germany autocratically by asserting the Führerprinzip (leader principle), which called for absolute obedience of all subordinates. He viewed the government structure as a pyramid, with himself—the infallible leader—at the apex. Rank in the party was not determined by elections; positions were filled through appointment by those of higher rank. [170] The party used propaganda to develop a cult of personality around Hitler. [171] Historians such as Kershaw emphasise the psychological impact of Hitler's skill as an orator. [172] Kressel writes, "Overwhelmingly ... Germans speak with mystification of Hitler's 'hypnotic' appeal". [173] Roger Gill states, "His moving speeches captured the minds and hearts of a vast number of the German people: he virtually hypnotized his audiences." [174]
Top officials reported to Hitler and followed his policies, but they had considerable autonomy. [175] Officials were expected to "work towards the Führer" – to take the initiative in promoting policies and actions in line with his wishes and the goals of the NSDAP, without Hitler having to be involved in the day-to-day running of the country. [176] The government was not a coordinated, co-operating body, but rather a disorganised collection of factions led by members of the party elite who struggled to amass power and gain the Führer's favour. [177] Hitler's leadership style was to give contradictory orders to his subordinates and to place them in positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped. [178] In this way he fostered distrust, competition, and infighting among his subordinates to consolidate and maximise his own power. [179]

Law
On 20 August 1934, civil servants were required to swear an oath of unconditional obedience to Hitler; a similar oath had been required of members of the military several weeks prior. This law became the basis of the Führerprinzip , the concept that Hitler's word overrode all existing laws. [180] Any acts that were sanctioned by Hitler—even murder—thus became legal. [181] All legislation proposed by cabinet ministers had to be approved by the office of Deputy Führer Rudolf Hess , who also had a veto over top civil service appointments. [182]
Most of the judicial system and legal codes of the Weimar Republic remained in use during and after the Nazi era to deal with non-political crimes. [183] The courts issued and carried out far more death sentences than before the Nazis took power. [183] People who were convicted of three or more offences—even petty ones—could be deemed habitual offenders and jailed indefinitely. [184] People such as prostitutes and pickpockets were judged to be inherently criminal and a threat to the racial community. Thousands were arrested and confined indefinitely without trial. [185]
Although the regular courts handled political cases and even issued death sentences for these cases, a new type of court, the Volksgerichtshof (People's Court), was established in 1934 to deal with politically important matters. [186] This court handed out over 5,000 death sentences until its dissolution in 1945. [187] The death penalty could be issued for offences such as being a communist, printing seditious leaflets, or even making jokes about Hitler or other top party officials. [188] Nazi Germany employed three types of capital punishment; hanging, decapitation, and death by shooting. [189] The Gestapo was in charge of investigative policing to enforce National Socialist ideology. They located and confined political offenders, Jews, and others deemed undesirable. [190] Political offenders who were released from prison were often immediately re-arrested by the Gestapo and confined in a concentration camp. [191]
In September 1935 the Nuremberg Laws were enacted. These laws initially prohibited sexual relations and marriages between Aryans and Jews and were later extended to include "Gypsies, Negroes or their bastard offspring". [192] The law also forbade the employment of German women under the age of 45 as domestic servants in Jewish households. [193] The Reich Citizenship Law stated that only those of "German or related blood" were eligible for citizenship. [194] At the same time the Nazis used propaganda to promulgate the concept of Rassenschande (race defilement) to justify the need for a restrictive law. [195] Thus Jews and other non-Aryans were stripped of their German citizenship. The wording of the law also potentially allowed the Nazis to deny citizenship to anyone who was not supportive enough of the regime. [194] A supplementary decree issued in November defined as Jewish anyone with three Jewish grandparents, or two grandparents if the Jewish faith was followed. [196]

Military and paramilitary

Wehrmacht
The unified armed forces of Germany from 1935 to 1945 were called the Wehrmacht . This included the Heer (army), Kriegsmarine (navy), and the Luftwaffe (air force). From 2 August 1934, members of the armed forces were required to pledge an oath of unconditional obedience to Hitler personally. In contrast to the previous oath, which required allegiance to the constitution of the country and its lawful establishments, this new oath required members of the military to obey Hitler even if they were being ordered to do something illegal. [197] Hitler decreed that the army would have to tolerate and even offer logistical support to the Einsatzgruppen —the mobile death squads responsible for millions of deaths in Eastern Europe—when it was tactically possible to do so. [198] Members of the Wehrmacht also participated directly in the Holocaust by shooting civilians or undertaking genocide under the guise of anti-partisan operations. [199] The party line was that the Jews were the instigators of the partisan struggle, and therefore needed to be eliminated. [200] On 8 July 1941, Heydrich announced that all Jews were to be regarded as partisans, and gave the order for all male Jews between the ages of 15 and 45 to be shot. [201]
In spite of efforts to prepare the country militarily, the economy could not sustain a lengthy war of attrition such as had occurred in World War I. A strategy was developed based on the tactic of Blitzkrieg (lightning war), which involved using quick coordinated assaults that avoided enemy strong points. Attacks began with artillery bombardment, followed by bombing and strafing runs. Next the tanks would attack and finally the infantry would move in to secure any ground that had been taken. [202] Victories continued through mid-1940, but the failure to defeat Britain was the first major turning point in the war. The decision to attack the Soviet Union and the decisive defeat at Stalingrad led to the retreat of the German armies and the eventual loss of the war. [203] The total number of soldiers who served in the Wehrmacht from 1935 to 1945 was around 18.2 million, of whom 5.3 million died. [124]

The SA and SS
The Sturmabteilung (SA; Storm Detachment; Brownshirts), founded in 1921, was the first paramilitary wing of the Nazi Party. Their initial assignment was to protect Nazi leaders at rallies and assemblies. [204] They also took part in street battles against the forces of rival political parties and violent actions against Jews and others. [205] By 1934, under Ernst Röhm 's leadership, the SA had grown to over half a million members—4.5 million including reserves—at a time when the regular army was still limited to 100,000 men by the Versailles Treaty. [206]
Röhm hoped to assume command of the army and absorb it into the ranks of the SA. [207] Hindenburg and Defence Minister Werner von Blomberg threatened to impose martial law if the alarming activities of the SA were not curtailed. [208] Hitler also suspected that Röhm was plotting to depose him, so he ordered the deaths of Röhm and other political enemies. Up to 200 people were killed from 30 June to 2 July 1934 in an event that became known as the Night of the Long Knives . [209] After this purge the SA was no longer a major force. [210]
Initially a force of a dozen men under the auspices of the SA, the Schutzstaffel (SS) grew to become one of the largest and most powerful groups in Nazi Germany. [211] Led by Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler from 1929, the SS had over a quarter million members by 1938 and continued to grow. [212] Himmler envisioned the SS as being an elite group of guards, Hitler's last line of defence. [213] The Waffen-SS , the military branch of the SS, became a de facto fourth branch of the Wehrmacht. [214] [215]
In 1931 Himmler organised an SS intelligence service which became known as the Sicherheitsdienst (SD; Security Service) under his deputy, SS- Obergruppenführer Reinhard Heydrich. [216] This organisation was tasked with locating and arresting communists and other political opponents. Himmler hoped it would eventually totally replace the existing police system. [217] [218] Himmler also established the beginnings of a parallel economy under the auspices of the SS Economy and Administration Head Office. This holding company owned housing corporations, factories, and publishing houses. [219] [220]
From 1935 forward the SS was heavily involved in the persecution of Jews, who were rounded up into ghettos and concentration camps. [221] With the outbreak of World War II, SS units called Einsatzgruppen followed the army into Poland and the Soviet Union, where from 1941 to 1945 they killed more than two million people, including 1.3 million Jews. [222] [223] The SS-Totenkopfverbände (death's head units) were in charge of the concentration camps and extermination camps , where millions more were killed. [224] [225]

Economy

Reich economics
The most pressing economic matter the Nazis initially faced was the 30 percent national unemployment rate. [226] Economist Dr. Hjalmar Schacht , President of the Reichsbank and Minister of Economics, created in May 1933 a scheme for deficit financing. Capital projects were paid for with the issuance of promissory notes called Mefo bills . When the notes were presented for payment, the Reichsbank printed money to do so. While the national debt soared, Hitler and his economic team expected that the upcoming territorial expansion would provide the means of repaying the debt. [227] Schacht's administration achieved a rapid decline in the unemployment rate, the largest of any country during the Great Depression. [226]
On 17 October 1933, aviation pioneer Hugo Junkers , owner of the Junkers Aircraft Works , was arrested. Within a few days his company was expropriated by the regime. In concert with other aircraft manufacturers and under the direction of Aviation Minister Göring, production was immediately ramped up industry-wide. From a workforce of 3,200 people producing 100 units per year in 1932, the industry grew to employ a quarter of a million workers manufacturing over 10,000 technically advanced aircraft per year less than ten years later. [228]
An elaborate bureaucracy was created to regulate German imports of raw materials and finished goods with the intention of eliminating foreign competition in the German marketplace and improving the nation's balance of payments . The Nazis encouraged the development of synthetic replacements for materials such as oil and textiles. [229] As the market was experiencing a glut and prices for petroleum were low, in 1933 the Nazi government made a profit-sharing agreement with IG Farben , guaranteeing them a 5 percent return on capital invested in their synthetic oil plant at Leuna . Any profits in excess of that amount would be turned over to the Reich. By 1936, Farben regretted making the deal, as the excess profits by then being generated had to be given to the government. [230]
Major public works projects financed with deficit spending included the construction of a network of Autobahns and providing funding for programmes initiated by the previous government for housing and agricultural improvements. [231] To stimulate the construction industry, credit was offered to private businesses and subsidies were made available for home purchases and repairs. [232] On the condition that the wife would leave the workforce, a loan of up to 1,000 Reichsmarks could be accessed by young couples of Aryan descent who intended to marry. The amount that had to be repaid was reduced by 25 percent for each child born. [233] The caveat that the woman had to remain unemployed was dropped by 1937 due to a shortage of skilled labourers. [234]
Hitler envisioned widespread car ownership as part of the new Germany. He arranged for designer Ferdinand Porsche to draw up plans for the KdF-wagen ( Strength Through Joy car), intended to be an automobile that every German citizen could afford. A prototype was displayed at the International Motor Show in Berlin on 17 February 1939. With the outbreak of World War II, the factory was converted to produce military vehicles. No production models were sold until after the war, when the vehicle was renamed the Volkswagen (people's car). [235]
Six million people were unemployed when the Nazis took power in 1933, and by 1937 there were fewer than a million. [236] This was in part due to the removal of women from the workforce. [237] Real wages dropped by 25 percent between 1933 and 1938. [226] Trade unions were abolished in May 1933 with the seizure of the funds and arrest of the leadership of the Social Democratic trade unions. A new organisation, the German Labour Front , was created and placed under NSDAP functionary Robert Ley . [238] The average German worked 43 hours a week in 1933, and by 1939 this increased to 47 hours a week. [239]
By early 1934 the focus shifted away from funding work creation schemes and toward rearmament. By 1935, military expenditures accounted for 73 percent of the government's purchases of goods and services. [240] On 18 October 1936 Hitler named Göring as Plenipotentiary of the Four Year Plan, intended to speed up the rearmament programme. [241] In addition to calling for the rapid construction of steel mills, synthetic rubber plants, and other factories, Göring instituted wage and price controls and restricted the issuance of stock dividends . [226] Large expenditures were made on rearmament, in spite of growing deficits. [242] With the introduction of compulsory military service in 1935, the Reichswehr , which had been limited to 100,000 by the terms of the Versailles Treaty, expanded to 750,000 on active service at the start of World War II, with a million more in the reserve. [243] By January 1939, unemployment was down to 301,800, and it dropped to only 77,500 by September. [244]

Wartime economy and forced labour
The Nazi war economy was a mixed economy that combined a free market with central planning; historian Richard Overy described it as being somewhere in between the command economy of the Soviet Union and the capitalist system of the United States. [245]
In 1942, after the death of Armaments Minister Fritz Todt , Hitler appointed Albert Speer as his replacement. [246] Speer improved production via streamlined organisation, the use of single-purpose machines operated by unskilled workers, rationalisation of production methods, and better co-ordination between the many different firms that made tens of thousands of components. Factories were relocated away from rail yards, which were bombing targets. [247] [248] By 1944, the war was consuming 75 percent of Germany's gross domestic product , compared to 60 percent in the Soviet Union and 55 percent in Britain. [249]
The wartime economy relied heavily upon the large-scale employment of forced labourers. Germany imported and enslaved some 12 million people from 20 European countries to work in factories and on farms; approximately 75 percent were Eastern European. [250] Many were casualties of Allied bombing, as they received poor air raid protection. Poor living conditions led to high rates of sickness, injury, and death, as well as sabotage and criminal activity. [251] The wartime economy also relied upon large-scale robbery, initially through the state seizing the property of Jewish citizens, and later by also plundering the resources of occupied territories. [252]
Foreign workers brought into Germany were put into four different classifications; guest workers, military internees, civilian workers, and Eastern workers. Different regulations were placed upon the worker depending on their classification. To separate Germans and foreign workers, the Nazis issued a ban on sexual relations between Germans and foreign workers. [253] [254]
Women played an increasingly large role. By 1944 over a half million served as auxiliaries in the German armed forces, especially in anti-aircraft units of the Luftwaffe; a half million worked in civil aerial defence; and 400,000 were volunteer nurses. They also replaced men in the wartime economy, especially on farms and in small family-owned shops. [255]
Very heavy strategic bombing by the Allies targeted refineries producing synthetic oil and gasoline as well as the German transportation system, especially rail yards and canals. [256] The armaments industry began to break down by September 1944. By November fuel coal was no longer reaching its destinations, and the production of new armaments was no longer possible. [257] Overy argues that the bombing strained the German war economy and forced it to divert up to one-fourth of its manpower and industry into anti-aircraft resources, which very likely shortened the war. [258]

Racial policy
Racism and antisemitism were basic tenets of the NSDAP and the Nazi regime. Nazi Germany's racial policy was based on their belief in the existence of a superior master race . The Nazis postulated the existence of a racial conflict between the Aryan master race and inferior races, particularly Jews, who were viewed as a mixed race that had infiltrated society and were responsible for the exploitation and repression of the Aryan race. [259]

Persecution of Jews
Discrimination against Jews began immediately after the seizure of power; following a month-long series of attacks by members of the SA on Jewish businesses, synagogues, and members of the legal profession, on 1 April 1933 Hitler declared a national boycott of Jewish businesses . [260] The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service , passed on 7 April, forced all non-Aryan civil servants to retire from the legal profession and civil service. [261] Similar legislation soon deprived Jewish members of other professions of their right to practise. On 11 April a decree was promulgated that stated anyone who had even one Jewish parent or grandparent was considered non-Aryan. As part of the drive to remove Jewish influence from cultural life, members of the National Socialist Student League removed from libraries any books considered un-German, and a nationwide book burning was held on 10 May. [262]
Violence and economic pressure were used by the regime to encourage Jews to voluntarily leave the country. [263] Jewish businesses were denied access to markets, forbidden to advertise in newspapers, and deprived of access to government contracts. Citizens were harassed and subjected to violent attacks. [264] Many towns posted signs forbidding entry to Jews. [265]
In November 1938, a young Jewish man requested an interview with the German ambassador in Paris. He met with a legation secretary, whom he shot and killed to protest his family's treatment in Germany. This incident provided the pretext for a pogrom the NSDAP incited against the Jews on 9 November 1938. Members of the SA damaged or destroyed synagogues and Jewish property throughout Germany. At least 91 German Jews were killed during this pogrom, later called Kristallnacht , the Night of Broken Glass. [266] [267] Further restrictions were imposed on Jews in the coming months – they were forbidden to own businesses or work in retail shops, drive cars, go to the cinema, visit the library, or own weapons. Jewish pupils were removed from schools. The Jewish community was fined one billion marks to pay for the damage caused by Kristallnacht and told that any money received via insurance claims would be confiscated. [268] By 1939 around 250,000 of Germany's 437,000 Jews emigrated to the United States, Argentina, Great Britain, Palestine, and other countries. [269] [270] Many chose to stay in continental Europe. Emigrants to Palestine were allowed to transfer property there under the terms of the Haavara Agreement , but those moving to other countries had to leave virtually all their property behind, and it was seized by the government. [270]

Persecution of Roma
Like the Jews, the Romani people were subjected to persecution from the early days of the regime. As a non-Aryan race, they were forbidden to marry people of German extraction. Romani were shipped to concentration camps starting in 1935 and were killed in large numbers. [161] [162]

People with disabilities
Action T4 was a programme of systematic murder of the physically and mentally handicapped and patients in psychiatric hospitals that mainly took place from 1939 to 1941 and continued until the end of the war. Initially the victims were shot by the Einsatzgruppen and others; in addition gas chambers and gas vans using carbon monoxide were used by early 1940. [271] [272] Under the provisions of a law promulgated 14 July 1933, the Nazi regime carried out the compulsory sterilisation of over 400,000 individuals labelled as having hereditary defects. [273] More than half the people sterilised were those considered mentally deficient, which included not only people who scored poorly on intelligence tests, but those who deviated from expected standards of behaviour regarding thrift, sexual behaviour, and cleanliness. Mentally and physically ill people were also targeted. The majority of the victims came from disadvantaged groups such as prostitutes, the poor, the homeless, and criminals. [274] Other groups persecuted and killed included Jehovah's Witnesses, homosexuals, social misfits, and members of the political and religious opposition . [162] [275]

The Holocaust
Germany's war in the East was based on Hitler's long-standing view that Jews were the great enemy of the German people and that Lebensraum was needed for Germany's expansion. Hitler focused his attention on Eastern Europe, aiming to defeat Poland, the Soviet Union and remove or kill the resident Jews and Slavs in the process. [158] [159] After the occupation of Poland, all Jews living in the General Government were confined to ghettos , and those who were physically fit were required to perform compulsory labour. [276] In 1941 Hitler decided to destroy the Polish nation completely. He planned that within 10 to 20 years the section of Poland under German occupation would be cleared of ethnic Poles and resettled by German colonists. [277] About 3.8 to 4 million Poles would remain as slaves, [278] part of a slave labour force of 14 million the Nazis intended to create using citizens of conquered nations in the East. [159] [279]
The Generalplan Ost (General Plan for the East) called for deporting the population of occupied Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union to Siberia, for use as slave labour or to be murdered. [280] To determine who should be killed, Himmler created the Volksliste , a system of classification of people deemed to be of German blood. [281] He ordered that those of Germanic descent who refused to be classified as ethnic Germans should be deported to concentration camps, have their children taken away, or be assigned to forced labour. [282] [283] The plan also included the kidnapping of children deemed to have Aryan- Nordic traits, who were presumed to be of German descent. [284] The goal was to implement Generalplan Ost after the conquest of the Soviet Union, but when the invasion failed, Hitler had to consider other options. [280] [285] One suggestion was a mass forced deportation of Jews to Poland, Palestine, or Madagascar. [276]
Somewhere around the time of the failed offensive against Moscow in December 1941, Hitler resolved that the Jews of Europe were to be exterminated immediately. [286] Plans for the total eradication of the Jewish population of Europe—eleven million people—were formalised at the Wannsee Conference on 20 January 1942. Some would be worked to death and the rest would be killed in the implementation of Die Endlösung der Judenfrage (the Final Solution of the Jewish question ). [287] Initially the victims were killed with gas vans or by Einsatzgruppen firing squads, but these methods proved impracticable for an operation of this scale. [288] By 1941, killing centres at Auschwitz concentration camp , Sobibor , Treblinka , and other Nazi extermination camps replaced Einsatzgruppen as the primary method of mass killing. [289] The total number of Jews murdered during the war is estimated at 5.5 to six million people, [225] including over a million children. [290] Twelve million people were put into forced labour. [250]
German citizens (despite much of the later denial) had access to information about what was happening, as soldiers returning from the occupied territories would report on what they had seen and done. [291] Evans states that most German citizens disapproved of the genocide. [292] [g] Some Polish citizens tried to rescue or hide the remaining Jews, and members of the Polish underground got word to their government in exile in London as to what was happening. [293]
In addition to eliminating Jews, the Nazis also planned to reduce the population of the conquered territories by 30 million people through starvation in an action called the Hunger Plan . Food supplies would be diverted to the German army and German civilians. Cities would be razed and the land allowed to return to forest or resettled by German colonists. [294] Together, the Hunger Plan and Generalplan Ost would have led to the starvation of 80 million people in the Soviet Union. [295] These partially fulfilled plans resulted in the democidal deaths of an estimated 19.3 million civilians and prisoners of war. [296]

Oppression of ethnic Poles
Poles were viewed by Nazis as subhuman non-Aryans. During the German occupation of Poland , 2.7 million ethnic Poles were killed by the Nazis. [297] Polish civilians were subject to forced labour in German industry , internment , wholesale expulsions to make way for German colonists and mass executions . The German authorities engaged in a systematic effort to destroy Polish culture and national identity. During operation AB-Aktion , many university professors and members of the Polish intelligentsia were arrested and executed, or transported to concentration camps. During the war, Poland lost an estimated 39 to 45 percent of its physicians and dentists, 26 to 57 percent of its lawyers, 15 to 30 percent of its teachers, 30 to 40 percent of its scientists and university professors, and 18 to 28 percent of its clergy. [298] Further, 43 percent of Poland's educational and research institutions and 14 percent of its museums had been destroyed. [299]

Mistreatment of Soviet POWs
During the war between June 1941 and January 1942, the Nazis killed an estimated 2.8 million Soviet prisoners of war. [300] Many starved to death while being held in open-air pens at Auschwitz and elsewhere. [301] The Soviet Union lost 27 million people during the war; less than nine million of these were combat deaths. [302] One in four of the population were killed or wounded. [303]

Society

Education
Antisemitic legislation passed in 1933 led to the removal all of Jewish teachers, professors, and officials from the education system. Most teachers were required to belong to the Nationalsozialistischer Lehrerbund ( National Socialist Teachers League ; NSLB), and university professors were required to join the National Socialist German Lecturers . [305] [306] Teachers had to take an oath of loyalty and obedience to Hitler, and those who failed to show sufficient conformity to party ideals were often reported by students or fellow teachers and dismissed. [307] [308] Lack of funding for salaries led to many teachers leaving the profession. The average class size increased from 37 in 1927 to 43 in 1938 due to the resulting teacher shortage. [309]
Frequent and often contradictory directives were issued by Reich Minister of the Interior Wilhelm Frick , Bernhard Rust of the Reichserziehungsministerium (Ministry of Education), and various other agencies regarding content of lessons and acceptable textbooks for use in primary and secondary schools. [310] Books deemed unacceptable to the regime were removed from school libraries. [311] Indoctrination in National Socialist thought was made compulsory in January 1934. [311] Students selected as future members of the party elite were indoctrinated from the age of 12 at Adolf Hitler Schools for primary education and National Political Institutes of Education for secondary education. Detailed National Socialist indoctrination of future holders of elite military rank was undertaken at Order Castles . [312]
Primary and secondary education focused on racial biology, population policy, culture, geography, and especially physical fitness. [313] The curriculum in most subjects, including biology, geography, and even arithmetic, was altered to change the focus to race. [314] Military education became the central component of physical education, and education in physics was oriented toward subjects with military applications, such as ballistics and aerodynamics. [315] [316] Students were required to watch all films prepared by the school division of the Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda . [311]
At universities, appointments to top posts were the subject of power struggles between the education ministry, the university boards, and the National Socialist German Students' League . [317] In spite of pressure from the League and various government ministries, most university professors did not make changes to their lectures or syllabus during the Nazi period. [318] This was especially true of universities located in predominately Catholic regions. [319] Enrolment at German universities declined from 104,000 students in 1931 to 41,000 in 1939. But enrolment in medical schools rose sharply; Jewish doctors had been forced to leave the profession, so medical graduates had good job prospects. [320] From 1934, university students were required to attend frequent and time-consuming military training sessions run by the SA. [321] First-year students also had to serve six months in a labour camp for the Reichsarbeitsdienst (National Labour Service); an additional ten weeks service were required of second-year students. [322]

Oppression of churches
When the Nazis seized power in 1933, 67 percent of the population of Germany was Protestant , 33 percent was Roman Catholic , while Jews made up less than 1 percent. [323] [324] According to 1939 census, 54 percent considered themselves Protestant, 40 percent Roman Catholic, 3.5 percent Gottgläubig (God-believing; a Nazi religious movement), and 1.5 percent nonreligious . [325]
Under the Gleichschaltung process, Hitler attempted to create a unified Protestant Reich Church from Germany's 28 existing Protestant state churches , [326] with the ultimate goal of eradication of the churches in Germany. [327] Ludwig Müller , a pro-Nazi, was installed as Reich Bishop, and the German Christians , a pro-Nazi pressure group, gained control of the new church. [328] They objected to the Old Testament because of its Jewish origins, and demanded that converted Jews be barred from their church. [329] Pastor Martin Niemöller responded with the formation of the Confessing Church , from which some clergymen opposed the Nazi regime. [330] When in 1935 the Confessing Church synod protested the Nazi policy on religion, 700 of their pastors were arrested. [331] Müller resigned and Hitler appointed Hanns Kerrl as Minister for Church Affairs, to continue efforts to control Protestantism. [332] In 1936, a Confessing Church envoy protested to Hitler against the religious persecutions and human rights abuses. [331] Hundreds more pastors were arrested. [332] The church continued to resist, and by early 1937 Hitler abandoned his hope of uniting the Protestant churches. [331] The Confessing Church was banned on 1 July 1937. Niemöller was arrested and confined, first in Sachsenhausen concentration camp and then at Dachau. [333] Theological universities were closed and more pastors and theologians were arrested. [331]
Persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany followed the Nazi takeover. [335] Hitler moved quickly to eliminate political Catholicism , rounding up functionaries of the Catholic-aligned Bavarian People's Party and Catholic Centre Party , which, along with all other non-Nazi political parties, ceased to exist by July. [336] The Reichskonkordat (Reich Concordat) treaty with the Vatican was signed in 1933, amid continuing harassment of the church in Germany. [273] The treaty required the regime to honour the independence of Catholic institutions and prohibited clergy from involvement in politics. [337] Hitler routinely disregarded the Concordat, closing all Catholic institutions whose functions were not strictly religious. [338] Clergy, nuns, and lay leaders were targeted, with thousands of arrests over the ensuing years, often on trumped-up charges of currency smuggling or immorality. [339] Several high-profile Catholic lay leaders were targeted in the 1934 Night of the Long Knives assassinations. [340] [341] [342] Most Catholic youth groups refused to dissolve themselves and Hitler Youth leader Baldur von Schirach encouraged members to attack Catholic boys in the streets. [343] Propaganda campaigns claimed the church was corrupt, restrictions were placed on public meetings, and Catholic publications faced censorship. Catholic schools were required to reduce religious instruction and crucifixes were removed from state buildings. [344]
Pope Pius XI had the " Mit brennender Sorge " ("With Burning Concern") Encyclical smuggled into Germany for Passion Sunday 1937 and read from every pulpit. It denounced the systematic hostility of the regime toward the church. [339] [345] In response, Goebbels renewed the regime's crackdown and propaganda against Catholics. Enrolment in denominational schools dropped sharply, and by 1939 all such schools were disbanded or converted to public facilities. [346] Later Catholic protests included the 22 March 1942 pastoral letter by the German bishops on "The Struggle against Christianity and the Church". [347] About 30 percent of Catholic priests were disciplined by police during the Nazi era. [348] [349] A vast security network spied on the activities of clergy, and priests were frequently denounced, arrested, or sent to concentration camps – many to the dedicated clergy barracks at Dachau. [350] In the areas of Poland annexed in 1939 , the Nazis instigated a brutal suppression and systematic dismantling of the Catholic Church. [351] [352]

Health
Nazi Germany had a strong anti-tobacco movement . Pioneering research by Franz H. Müller in 1939 demonstrated a causal link between tobacco smoking and lung cancer. [353] The Reich Health Office took measures to try to limit smoking, including producing lectures and pamphlets. [354] Smoking was banned in many workplaces, on trains, and among on-duty members of the military. [355] Government agencies also worked to control other carcinogenic substances such as asbestos and pesticides. [356] As part of a general public health campaign, water supplies were cleaned up, lead and mercury were removed from consumer products, and women were urged to undergo regular screenings for breast cancer. [357]
Government-run health care insurance plans were available, but Jews were denied coverage starting in 1933. That same year, Jewish doctors were forbidden to treat government-insured patients. In 1937 Jewish doctors were forbidden to treat non-Jewish patients, and in 1938 their right to practice medicine was removed entirely. [358]
Medical experiments, many of them pseudoscientific , were performed on concentration camp inmates beginning in 1941. [359] The most notorious doctor to perform medical experiments was SS- Hauptsturmführer Dr Josef Mengele , camp doctor at Auschwitz. [360] Many of his victims died or were intentionally killed. [361] Concentration camp inmates were made available for purchase by pharmaceutical companies for drug testing and other experiments. [362]

Role of women and family
Women were a cornerstone of Nazi social policy. The Nazis opposed the feminist movement, claiming that it was the creation of Jewish intellectuals, and instead advocated a patriarchal society in which the German woman would recognise that her "world is her husband, her family, her children, and her home." [237] Soon after the seizure of power, feminist groups were shut down or incorporated into the National Socialist Women's League . This organisation coordinated groups throughout the country to promote motherhood and household activities. Courses were offered on childrearing, sewing, and cooking. [363] The League published the NS-Frauen-Warte , the only NSDAP-approved women's magazine in Nazi Germany. [364] Despite some propaganda aspects, it was predominantly an ordinary woman's magazine. [365]
Women were encouraged to leave the workforce, and the creation of large families by racially suitable women was promoted through a propaganda campaign. Women received a bronze award—known as the Ehrenkreuz der Deutschen Mutter ( Cross of Honour of the German Mother )—for giving birth to four children, silver for six, and gold for eight or more. [363] Large families received subsidies to help with their utilities, school fees, and household expenses. Though the measures led to increases in the birth rate, the number of families having four or more children declined by five percent between 1935 and 1940. [366] Removing women from the workforce did not have the intended effect of freeing up jobs for men. Women were for the most part employed as domestic servants, weavers, or in the food and drink industries—jobs that were not of interest to men. [367] Nazi philosophy prevented large numbers of women from being hired to work in munitions factories in the build-up to the war, so foreign labourers were brought in. After the war started, slave labourers were extensively used. [368] In January 1943 Hitler signed a decree requiring all women under the age of fifty to report for work assignments to help the war effort. [369] Thereafter, women were funnelled into agricultural and industrial jobs. By September 1944, 14.9 million women were working in munitions production. [370]
The Nazi regime discouraged women from seeking higher education. Nazi leaders held conservative views about women and endorsed the idea that rational and theoretical work was alien to a woman's nature since they were considered inherently emotional and instinctive – as such, engaging in academics and careerism would only "divert them from motherhood." [371] The number of women allowed to enroll in universities dropped drastically, as a law passed in April 1933 limited the number of females admitted to university to ten percent of the number of male attendees. [372] Female enrolment in secondary schools dropped from 437,000 in 1926 to 205,000 in 1937. The number of women enrolled in post-secondary schools dropped from 128,000 in 1933 to 51,000 in 1938. However, with the requirement that men be enlisted into the armed forces during the war, women comprised half of the enrolment in the post-secondary system by 1944. [373]
Women were expected to be strong, healthy, and vital. [374] The sturdy peasant woman who worked the land and bore strong children was considered ideal, and athletic women were praised for being tanned from working outdoors. [375] Organisations were created for the indoctrination of Nazi values. From 25 March 1939, membership in the Hitler Youth became compulsory for all children over the age of ten. [376] The Jungmädelbund (Young Girls League) section of the Hitler Youth was for girls age 10 to 14, and the Bund Deutscher Mädel (BDM; League of German Girls ) was for young women age 14 to 18. The BDM's activities focused on physical education, with activities such as running, long jumping, somersaulting, tightrope walking, marching, and swimming. [377]
The Nazi regime promoted a liberal code of conduct regarding sexual matters, and was sympathetic to women who bore children out of wedlock. [378] Promiscuity increased as the war progressed, with unmarried soldiers often intimately involved with several women simultaneously. The same was the case for married women, who liaised with soldiers, civilians, or slave labourers. Sex was sometimes used as a commodity to obtain, for example, better work from a foreign labourer. [378] Pamphlets enjoined German women to avoid sexual relations with foreign workers as a danger to their blood. [379]
With Hitler's approval, Himmler intended that the new society of the Nazi regime should de-stigmatise illegitimate births, particularly of children fathered by members of the SS, who were vetted for racial purity. [380] His hope was that each SS family would have between four and six children. [380] The Lebensborn (Fountain of Life) association, founded by Himmler in 1935, created a series of maternity homes where single mothers could be accommodated during their pregnancies. [381] Both parents were examined for racial suitability before acceptance. [381] The resulting children were often adopted into SS families. [381] The homes were also made available to the wives of SS and NSDAP members, who quickly filled over half the available spots. [382]
Existing laws banning abortion except for medical reasons were strictly enforced by the Nazi regime. The number of abortions declined from 35,000 per year at the start of the 1930s to fewer than 2,000 per year at the end of the decade. In 1935 a law was passed allowing abortions for eugenics reasons. [383]

Environmentalism
Nazi society had elements supportive of animal rights, and many people were fond of zoos and wildlife. [384] The government took several measures to ensure the protection of animals and the environment. In 1933, the Nazis enacted a stringent animal-protection law that affected what was allowed for medical research. [385] But the law was only loosely enforced. In spite of a ban on vivisection, the Ministry of the Interior readily handed out permits for experiments on animals. [386]
The Reich Forestry Office, under Göring, enforced regulations that required foresters to plant a wide variety of trees to ensure suitable habitat for wildlife. A new Reich Animal Protection Act became law in 1933. [387] The regime enacted the Reich Nature Protection Act in 1935 to protect the natural landscape from excessive economic development. The act allowed for the expropriation of privately owned land to create nature preserves and aided in long-range planning. [388] Perfunctory efforts were made to curb air pollution, but little enforcement of existing legislation was undertaken once the war began. [389]

Culture
The regime promoted the concept of Volksgemeinschaft , a national German ethnic community. The goal was to build a classless society based on racial purity and the perceived need to prepare for warfare, conquest, and a struggle against Marxism. [390] [391] The German Labour Front founded the Kraft durch Freude (KdF; Strength Through Joy) organisation in 1933. In addition to taking control of tens of thousands of previously privately run recreational clubs, it offered highly regimented holidays and entertainment experiences such as cruises, vacation destinations, and concerts. [392] [393]
The Reichskulturkammer (Reich Chamber of Culture) was organised under the control of the Propaganda Ministry in September 1933. Sub-chambers were set up to control various aspects of cultural life, such as films, radio, newspapers, fine arts, music, theatre, and literature. All members of these professions were required to join their respective organisation. Jews and people considered politically unreliable were prevented from working in the arts, and many emigrated. Books and scripts had to be approved by the Propaganda Ministry prior to publication. Standards deteriorated as the regime sought to use cultural outlets exclusively as propaganda media. [394]
Radio became very popular in Germany during the 1930s, with over 70 percent of households owning a receiver by 1939, more than any other country. Radio station staffs were purged of leftists and others deemed undesirable by July 1933. [395] Propaganda and speeches were typical radio fare immediately after the seizure of power, but as time went on Goebbels insisted that more music be played so that people would not turn to foreign broadcasters for entertainment. [396]
As with other media, newspapers were controlled by the state, with the Reich Press Chamber shutting down or buying newspapers and publishing houses. By 1939 over two-thirds of the newspapers and magazines were directly owned by the Propaganda Ministry. [397] The NSDAP daily newspaper, the Völkischer Beobachter (Ethnic Observer), was edited by Alfred Rosenberg , author of The Myth of the Twentieth Century , a book of racial theories espousing Nordic superiority. [398] Goebbels controlled the wire services and insisted that all newspapers in Germany should only publish content favourable to the regime. His propaganda ministry issued two dozen directives every week on exactly what news should be published and what angles to use; the typical newspaper followed the directives very closely. [399] Newspaper readership plummeted, partly because of the decreased quality of the content, and partly because of the surge in popularity of radio. [400]
Authors of books left the country in droves, and some wrote material highly critical of the regime while in exile. Goebbels recommended that the remaining authors should concentrate on books themed on Germanic myths and the concept of blood and soil . By the end of 1933 over a thousand books, most of them by Jewish authors or featuring Jewish characters, had been banned by the Nazi regime. [401]
Hitler took a personal interest in architecture, and worked closely with state architects Paul Troost and Albert Speer to create public buildings in a neoclassical style based on Roman architecture . [402] [403] Speer constructed imposing structures such as the Nazi party rally grounds in Nuremberg and a new Reich Chancellery building in Berlin. [404] Hitler's plans for rebuilding Berlin included a gigantic dome based on the Pantheon in Rome and a triumphal arch more than double the height of the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. Neither of these structures were ever built. [405]
Hitler felt that abstract , Dadaist , expressionist , and modern art were decadent, an opinion that became the basis for policy. [406] Many art museum directors lost their posts in 1933 and were replaced by party members. [407] Some 6,500 modern works of art were removed from museums and replaced with works chosen by a Nazi jury. [408] Exhibitions of the rejected pieces, under titles such as "Decadence in Art", were launched in sixteen different cities by 1935. The Degenerate Art Exhibition , organised by Goebbels, ran in Munich from July to November 1937. The exhibition proved wildly popular, attracting over two million visitors. [409]
Composer Richard Strauss was appointed president of the Reichsmusikkammer (Reich Music Chamber) on its founding in November 1933. [410] As was the case with other art forms, the Nazis ostracised musicians who were not deemed racially acceptable, and for the most part did not approve of music that was too modern or atonal . [411] Jazz music was singled out as being especially inappropriate, and foreign musicians of this genre left the country or were expelled. [412] Hitler favoured the music of Richard Wagner , especially pieces based on Germanic myths and heroic stories, and attended the Bayreuth Festival each year from 1933. [411]
Movies were popular in Germany in the 1930s and 1940s, with admissions of over a billion people in 1942, 1943, and 1944. [413] [414] By 1934 German regulations restricting currency exports made it impossible for American film makers to take their profits back to America, so the major film studios closed their German branches. Exports of German films plummeted, as their heavily antisemitic content made them impossible to show in other countries. The two largest film companies, Universum Film AG and Tobis , were purchased by the Propaganda Ministry, which by 1939 was producing most German films. The productions were not always overtly propagandistic, but generally had a political subtext and followed party lines regarding themes and content. Scripts were pre-censored. [415]
Leni Riefenstahl 's Triumph of the Will (1935), documenting the 1934 Nuremberg Rally, and Olympia (1938), covering the 1936 Summer Olympics , pioneered techniques of camera movement and editing that influenced later films. New techniques such as telephoto lenses and cameras mounted on tracks were employed. Both films remain controversial, as their aesthetic merit is inseparable from their propagandising of National Socialist ideals. [416] [417]

Legacy
The Allied powers organised war crimes trials, beginning with the Nuremberg trials , held from November 1945 to October 1946, of 23 top Nazi officials. They were charged with four counts—conspiracy to commit crimes, crimes against peace, war crimes , and crimes against humanity —in violation of international laws governing warfare. [418] All but three of the defendants were found guilty; twelve were sentenced to death. [419] The victorious Allies outlawed the NSDAP and its subsidiary organisations. The display or use of Nazi symbolism such as flags, swastikas , or greetings, is illegal in Germany and Austria, [420] [421] and other restrictions, mainly on public display, apply in various countries. See Swastika § Post–World War II stigmatization for details.
Nazi ideology and the actions taken by the regime are almost universally regarded as gravely immoral. [422] Hitler, Nazism, and the Holocaust have become symbols of evil in the modern world. [423] Interest in Nazi Germany continues in the media and the academic world. Historian Sir Richard J. Evans remarks that the era "exerts an almost universal appeal because its murderous racism stands as a warning to the whole of humanity." [424]
The Nazi era continues to inform how Germans view themselves and their country. Virtually every family suffered losses during the war or has a story to tell. For many years Germans kept quiet about their experiences and felt a sense of communal guilt, even if they were not directly involved in war crimes. Once study of Nazi Germany was introduced into the school curriculum starting in the 1970s, people began researching the experiences of their family members. Study of the era and a willingness to critically examine its mistakes has led to the development of a strong democracy in today's Germany, but with lingering undercurrents of antisemitism and neo-Nazi thought. [425]

See also

Notes
WebPage index: 00006
Temperatures Rising
Temperatures Rising was an American television sitcom that aired on the ABC network from September 12, 1972 to August 29, 1974. During its 46-episode run, it was presented in three different formats and cast line-ups. The series was developed for the network by William Asher and Harry Ackerman for Ashmont Productions and Screen Gems . Set in a fictional Washington, D.C. hospital, the series featured James Whitmore as a no-nonsense chief of staff, forced to deal with the outlandish antics of a young intern ( Cleavon Little ) and three nurses ( Joan Van Ark , Reva Rose , and Nancy Fox).
For the first season, 26 episodes were produced and broadcast. In the second season, Whitmore was replaced in the lead role by comedian Paul Lynde , and Asher was replaced as producer by Duke Vincent and Bruce Johnson. The series was re-titled The New Temperatures Rising Show , and featured a new supporting cast: Sudie Bond, Barbara Cason , Jennifer Darling , Jeff Morrow , and John Dehner . Cleavon Little was the only returning member of the original cast. In this season, Lynde was presented as the penny-pinching chief of staff, with Bond as his nagging mother and owner of the hospital.
The New Temperatures Rising Show ran for 13 episodes before being placed on hiatus in January 1974 due to poor ratings. It returned in July in yet another incarnation. Asher returned as producer and restored the series to its original format—albeit with Lynde continuing in the lead. Reverting to the original title of Temperatures Rising , Little remained in the show's cast, accompanied by a new line-up of supporting players: Alice Ghostley , Barbara Rucker and, returning from the first season's cast, Nancy Fox. Offered as a summer replacement on Thursday nights, the third version of the sitcom ran for seven episodes, after which it was cancelled permanently.

First season

Concept and development
Temperatures Rising was one of two sitcoms that the ABC network premiered in its 1972–73 prime time schedule, the other being The Paul Lynde Show . [nb 1] Both series were produced and developed by William Asher and his partner Harry Ackerman for Ashmont Productions and Screen Gems, which had scored a major success for the network with Bewitched , a fantasy sitcom that first aired in 1964 starring Asher's wife, Elizabeth Montgomery . Asher and Screen Gems made a deal with ABC to cancel Bewitched a year earlier than contracts stipulated, thereby allowing them the opportunity to develop the two new sitcoms. [3] Ackerman served as executive producer and Asher as producer . [4]
Asher and Ackerman derived the format of the series from an unsold pilot they had produced for ABC in 1965. Entitled This is a Hospital? , and written by Sheldon Keller , it starred comedian Shecky Greene as a mischievous intern who Asher referred to as " Sgt. Bilko in a hospital". [nb 2] Asher also drew on the British Carry On franchise as his inspiration for Temperatures Rising . [6] [7]

Original cast
Set in Capitol General, a fictional Washington, D.C., hospital, the series centered on five characters. Cleavon Little starred as Dr. Jerry Noland, a ghetto-raised intern who works on the side as the hospital bookie and finds humor in anything from an operation to a con job. [8] [9] Joan Van Ark played Annie Carlisle, the hospital's beautiful, [10] young, sexy [8] head nurse, who is "always covering up for the inept crew". [11] Reva Rose played Nurse Mildred "Millie" MacInerny, who offers satirical comments on the shenanigans going on in the hospital. [2] Nancy Fox was cast as Ellen Turner, a shy student nurse who becomes Noland's most faithful follower. [2] [10] James Whitmore starred as Dr. Vincent Campanelli, the hospital's chief of surgery. [nb 3] Campanelli is presented as an Italian-American former combat surgeon, who looks upon Noland with both pride and shock and refers to the young intern and nurses Carlisle, MacInerny, and Turner as the " Four Horsemen of Aggravation". [13]
Little's guest appearance on All in the Family led to his casting in Temperatures Rising , [14] which in turn led to the leading role in the 1974 Mel Brooks comedy film Blazing Saddles . Little's casting reflected "pressure from the government and Negro organizations and concerned whites who believe that black representation on television was long overdue". [15] William Asher later stated that Temperatures Rising gave him a chance to work with a black actor. [16] Fox was cast in Temperatures Rising after Elizabeth Montgomery spotted her in a commercial for Close-Up toothpaste. [17] Asher had considered her for a part in The Paul Lynde Show . During the time that Temperatures Rising was in production, Fox declined an offer to leave the series and star in another, Needles and Pins . [18] [19] [20]

Overview
In a 2000 interview, William Asher described Temperatures Rising as being about: "a young black surgeon who was always into mischief and things, but he was a very competent surgeon. James Whitmore was the head surgeon and he used to drive Whitmore crazy". [16] The pilot episode of Temperatures Rising was written by Sheldon Keller, who turned to his This is a Hospital? script for inspiration. [7] It features Noland broadcasting a bingo game in code over the hospital's public-address system. Jack Albertson guest starred as a United States Senator. [21] Subsequent episodes feature Noland performing a secret operation on a young baseball player while Campanelli deals with a hospital inspector ( Ed Platt ), [22] and John Astin as a gangster wanting Noland to be his personal physician. [23] In another episode, Noland hypnotizes a patient ( Alice Ghostley ) and, accidentally, Nurse Turner as well. This nearly costs the hospital a large donation from a potential benefactor ( Charles Lane ). [24] In later episodes, Campanelli is seen having a brief romance with Nurse Turner's aunt ( Beverly Garland ), [25] Noland helps out a new intern ( Bernie Kopell ) who has a reputation for being a jinx, [26] and also performs a witchcraft ritual on a patient ( Alan Oppenheimer ) who thinks he has been cursed. [27]
Albertson returned in a later episode that features Dr. Campanelli participating in a documentary film about hospital surgery. Unfortunately, Campanelli develops stage fright during filming. Noland then takes over the operation and receives all the acclaim. [28] Kopell returned to his role as a hospital orderly in two episodes, one in which he causes a furor with a hospital scandal sheet, [29] the other showing Noland having to save him from being fleeced by a patient who is also a card shark . [30]
There was some racially tinged comic bantering in the series, such as scenes with Noland giving cotton to a nurse and stating, "Honey, picking cotton is part of my heritage," or observing some adhesive strips labeled "flesh colored" and remarking, "Maybe this is your idea of flesh colored, but it wouldn't make it in my neighborhood." Aside from these, racial issues were avoided, as Asher and Ackerman felt that ABC was not interested in having them mixed into the comedy. [31]
In discussing the series Asher noted:
Production of Temperatures Rising was underway by August 1972 with filming done at the Burbank Studios in Burbank, California . [8]

Original reviews
In his review of the premiere episode of Temperatures Rising for the Los Angeles Times , critic Don Page felt that James Whitmore was "totally wasted in this silly exercise" and that "guest Jack Albertson almost saves it with his portrayal of an annoyed senator. Otherwise, the diagnosis is terminal comedy". [11] Likewise, Cecil Smith, another writer for the Times , claimed it was the "worst show of the season. Avoid it like the plague". [32]
Other reviews were more favorable. Columnist Joan Crosby noted that "This is the kind of show you don't think you'll laugh at, but you do, mostly because the cast is so good." She noted that Cleavon Little, Joan Van Ark, and Reva Rose were, respectively, "marvelous", "pretty", and "funny", and that Nancy Fox "wins this year's cute-as-a-kitten award". [33] Barbara Holsopple, TV and radio editor for the Pittsburgh Press , noted that "ABC did a gutsy turnabout in taking the heavy drama out of a hospital and replacing it with comedy. The venture worked well, thanks to excellent performances from the Temperatures Rising cast". She praised Albertson, noted that Whitmore "was little seen", and that the series: "is the kind of tidy little show that brings chuckles". [10] Win Fanning, a syndicated columnist, stated that: "the comedy writing and performances by a beautifully integrated cast give Temperatures a bright, light quality so seldom achieved in a situation comedy", and that it was: "loaded with one-liners and sight gags, which, if kept on the level of the opener, promise many hours of hilarity". Fanning praised Little as "one of the comedy finds of any TV season", and Fox as "a fresh new face and talent giving promise of a long, successful career ahead". [34] More praise for the series came after the broadcast of its fourth episode. An unidentified reviewer, writing for the Armored Sentinel (of Temple, Texas ), stated "If you're suffering from the case of the 'downs,' this series is a sure pick up!" The reviewer went on to note that "the brightest spot of the series is wacky Nancy Fox. Her role applies the wackiness of Goldie Hawn , but in situation comedy form. I'd watch the show just for her! The whole series is wacky and funny; it's downright good. I highly recommend it." [35]

First season ratings
ABC placed Temperatures Rising in its 8:00 PM Tuesday night time-slot, where it debuted on September 12, 1972. [8] [nb 4] Because one of the stars was black, some of ABC's affiliated stations in the southern and midwestern parts of the United States refused to air the series or broadcast it in a different time slot. [45] Airing opposite it were Bonanza on NBC , and the new sitcom Maude on CBS . [46] Bonanza was entering its fourteenth year and offered up an ambitious two-hour season premiere dealing with the marriage of Little Joe Cartwright ( Michael Landon ). Maude , starring Beatrice Arthur in the title role, was a spin-off of All in the Family . Both shows presented Temperatures Rising with stiff opposition in the " ratings game ". [10] The two-hour season premiere of Bonanza performed exceptionally well in the ratings. Maude did much better than Temperatures Rising in the New York City area, while Temperatures Rising fared better than Maude in the Los Angeles area. [47] In subsequent weeks, Bonanza' s ratings dropped sharply and NBC cancelled the series in November 1972. [48] [nb 5] According to Asher: " Temperatures Rising put Bonanza out of business and was beating Maude in the Los Angeles area until mid-season, when NBC switched to some heavy movies which hurt us". [3] Despite this the series finished its first year with a consistent 29 share of the ratings at a time when a 30 share was enough to assure renewal for another season. ABC, however, wanted to improve the ratings and decided to make significant changes to Temperatures Rising for its second season. [3] [50]

Second season

New premise and producers
As early as November 1972, James Whitmore expressed a desire to leave Temperatures Rising , claiming that "the show [was] basically a broad farce and I didn't feel it was right for me". [51] Screen Gems head John Mitchell and ABC chief programmer Barry Diller decided to replace Whitmore with comedian Paul Lynde, whose sitcom, The Paul Lynde Show , was airing on Wednesday nights. At the time, Lynde was scoring second only to Peter Falk in TV popularity polls even though his sitcom, which aired opposite The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour on CBS, was floundering in the ratings. Asher was against making this change but was overruled as his contractual commitments to ABC had been used up. [3] [16] [50]
Of the change Asher stated:
Asher was replaced as producer by Bruce Johnson and Duke Vincent, whose previous credits included: Gomer Pyle – USMC , The Jim Nabors Hour , Arnie , and The Little People . [nb 6] They changed the title of the series to The New Temperatures Rising Show , and the tone went from lighthearted wackiness to a form of black comedy similar to The Hospital , a 1971 film written by Paddy Chayefsky , starring George C. Scott . The sitcom became: "a savage satire of the medical profession" with $185-a-day hospital rooms, incompetent, fee-splitting doctors, operations on the wrong patients, misread X-rays , and rampant malpractice . [52] Commenting on the series Vincent noted:

Revised cast
For this new season, Johnson and Vincent dropped Joan Van Ark, Reva Rose, and Nancy Fox from the series, leaving Cleavon Little as the only returning cast member. His character, Dr. Jerry Noland, was now being presented as the hospital's only sane figure. [52] Paul Lynde played Dr. Paul Mercy, the sneering, unscrupulous, hospital administrator [53] while Sudie Bond was cast as Martha Mercy, his obnoxious, overbearing mother and the owner, and permanent resident, of the hospital. She constantly calls him with her pager to complain about everything. [52] [54] Also in the new cast were Barbara Cason as Miss Tillis, the head of administrative and accounting: "... who would let you bleed to death filling out forms", [53] Jennifer Darling as the romantically inclined nurse "Windy" Winchester, Jeff Morrow as Dr. Lloyd Axton, a fraudulent surgeon who has published two books, Profit in Healing and Malpractice and Its Defense , and John Dehner as "society" Dr. Charles Claver. [54] [55]

Revised concept
For the 1973–74 television season ABC continued to air the revamped Temperatures Rising on Tuesday nights at 8:00 PM. CBS continued to air Maude , and NBC introduced Chase , an hour-long crime drama starring Mitchell Ryan , in the same time slot. Although the season premiere of Maude and Chase 's debut aired on September 11, 1973, ABC delayed the premiere of The New Temperatures Rising Show until September 25. [56] [57] [nb 7]
The episodes produced by Johnson and Vincent included Dr. Mercy exploiting a 125-year-old Civil War veteran [59] and dealing with a strike by the doctors and nurses. [60] Another episode saw Noland create a mythical patient and then claim that the patient died, the cause of death being the result of a lack of cardiac crash carts on each floor of the hospital. [61] Johnson and Vincent's favorite episode was one where the X-rays of a professional footballer are misread, resulting in him being placed by mistake in "Crutchfield's Traction", in which holes are drilled in his head and tongs inserted in them. [52]

Second season reviews
In reviewing The New Temperatures Rising Show , Associated Press television writer Jay Sharbutt noted:
Likewise, Los Angeles Times critic Cecil Smith, who considered the original format "maybe the three worse shows on television rolled into one" now remarked: "Paul Lynde for the first time that I can recall has a part worthy of his mettle. The people surrounding him are first rate." [53]

Sinking ratings
Despite some heavy promotion the black comedy approach was not what audiences wanted to see, especially with Paul Lynde. As a result, the ratings for the series fell well below the levels of the previous season. [3] The last of The New Temperatures Rising Show' s thirteen episodes aired on January 8, 1974. [63] The following Tuesday, January 15, ABC premiered Happy Days in its place. [64] [nb 8] According to co-producer Mitchell, "... the audience didn't buy that at all . They just didn't get it. It was funny if you like black comedy, but if you don't it would disturb you. So the show failed miserably and we lost the job and the show." [65]

Summer replacement

Third concept
When John Mitchell and Barry Diller noticed that The New Temperatures Rising Show was failing, they contacted William Asher and asked him to salvage the series. According to Asher:
As to why the series was not cancelled, Asher remarked, "I can answer that in two words: Paul Lynde." [3]

Final cast
For the third format, the show reverted to its original title Temperatures Rising , and the proposed number of episodes was reduced from eleven to seven. The series' production resumed on November 17, 1973, after a three-week shutdown. [66] Sudie Bond, Barbara Cason, Jennifer Darling, Jeff Morrow, and John Dehner were dropped from the cast and a new line-up was assembled. Paul Lynde continued as Dr. Paul Mercy while Alice Ghostley played Edwina Moffitt, the admissions nurse and Dr. Mercy's sister. [67] She had appeared as a guest star in an episode in the first season of Temperatures Rising . Nancy Fox returned as student nurse Ellen Turner, [67] and Barbara Rucker was introduced as Nurse Amanda Kelly. [67] Cleavon Little returned for a third time as Dr. Jerry Nolan, whose character was now being presented as somewhere between the jive-talking surgeon of the first season and the serious one of the second. [3]

Last format and cancellation
Temperatures Rising returned to the ABC network on July 18, 1974 after a six-month hiatus. Its new time slot, Thursday nights at 8:00 PM, had previously been occupied by Chopper One , an adventure series. [67] The situations presented this time around included Dr. Mercy saving the life of a popular country music singer ( Dick Gautier ), [68] and setting up a surveillance system so that staff would be kept on their toes. [69]
The final episode of Temperatures Rising aired on August 29, 1974. [70] [nb 9] The attempt to resuscitate the series was unsuccessful, and ABC finally cancelled it permanently. Andy Siegel, a comedy development executive for ABC at the time, felt the series failed because audiences did not want to watch a show displaying inadequate medical care, even though it was done in a humorous fashion. In reminiscing about the series he stated: "When people see doctors on television they really want to feel that they're in good hands. That no matter what happens it is a reassuring experience." [72] William Asher, in a 2000 interview, summed up the demise of the series by saying: "It didn't get on. It's too late. You can't do that to an audience. They won't accept it." [16]

Episodes
WebPage index: 00007
Leafhopper
Leafhopper is a common name applied to any species from the family Cicadellidae . These minute insects , colloquially known as hoppers , are plant feeders that suck plant sap from grass, shrubs, or trees. Their hind legs are modified for jumping, and are covered with hairs that facilitate the spreading of a secretion over their bodies that acts as a water repellent and carrier of pheromones . [1] They undergo a partial metamorphosis , and have various host associations, varying from very generalized to very specific. Some species have a cosmopolitan distribution, or occur throughout the temperate and tropical regions. Some are pests or vectors of plant viruses and phytoplasmas . [1] The family is distributed all over the world, and constitutes the second-largest hemipteran family, with at least 20,000 described species.
They belong to a lineage traditionally treated as infraorder Cicadomorpha in the suborder Auchenorrhyncha , but as the latter taxon is probably not monophyletic , many modern authors prefer to abolish the Auchenorrhyncha and elevate the cicadomorphs to a suborder Clypeorrhyncha. Members of the tribe Proconiini of the subfamily Cicadellinae are commonly known as sharpshooters .

Description and ecology
The Cicadellidae combine the following features:
An additional and unique character of leafhoppers is the production of brochosomes , which are thought to protect the animals, and particularly their egg clutches , from predation and pathogens.
Like other Exopterygota , the leafhoppers undergo direct development from nymph to adult without a pupal stage. While many leafhoppers are drab little insects as is typical for the Membracoidea , the adults and nymphs of some species are quite colorful. Some – in particular Stegelytrinae – have largely translucent wings and resemble flies at a casual glance.
Leafhoppers have piercing-sucking mouthparts , enabling them to feed on plant sap . A leafhoppers' diet commonly consists of sap from a wide and diverse range of plants, but some are more host -specific. Leafhoppers mainly are herbivores , but some are known to eat smaller insects, such as aphids , on occasion. A few species are known to be mud-puddling , but as it seems, females rarely engage in such behavior.
Leafhoppers can transmit plant pathogens , such as viruses , phytoplasmas [2] and bacteria . Cicadellidae species that are significant agricultural pests include the beet leafhopper ( Circulifer tenellus ), the maize leafhopper ( Cicadulina mbila ), potato leafhopper ( Empoasca fabae ), two-spotted leafhopper ( Sophonia rufofascia ), blue-green sharpshooter ( Graphocephala atropunctata ), glassy-winged sharpshooter ( Homalodisca vitripennis ), the common brown leafhopper ( Orosius orientalis ), rice green leafhoppers ( Nephotettix spp.), and the white apple leafhopper ( Typhlocyba pomaria ). The beet leafhopper ( Circulifer tenellus ) can transmit the beet curly top virus to various members of the nightshade family, including tobacco, tomato, or eggplant, and is a serious vector of the disease in chili pepper in the Southwestern United States.
In some cases, the plant pathogens distributed by leafhoppers are also pathogens of the insects themselves, and can replicate within the leafhoppers' salivary glands . Leafhoppers are also susceptible to various insect pathogens, including Dicistroviridae viruses , bacteria and fungi ; numerous parasitoids attack the eggs and the adults provide food for small insectivores .
Some species such as the Australian Kahaono montana even build silk nests under the leaves of trees they live in, to protect them from predators. [3]

Systematics
In the now-obsolete classification that was used throughout much of the 20th century, the leafhoppers were part of the Homoptera, a paraphyletic assemblage uniting the less advanced lineages of Hemiptera and ranked as suborder . The splitting of the Homoptera is likely to be repeated for the Auchenorrhyncha for similar reasons, as the Auchenorrhyncha simply seem to group the moderately advanced Hemiptera, regardless of the fact the highly apomorphic Coleorrhyncha and Heteroptera (typical bugs) evolved from auchenorrhynchans. Hence, a recent trend treats the most advanced hemipterans as three or four lineages, namely Archaeorrhyncha (Fulgoromorpha if included in Auchenorrhyncha), Coleorrhyncha and Heteroptera (sometimes united as Prosorrhyncha ) and Clypeorrhyncha. [4] [5] [6]
Within the latter, the three traditional superfamilies – Cercopoidea (froghoppers and spittlebugs), Cicadoidea (cicadas) and Membracoidea – appear to be monophyletic . The leafhoppers are the most basal living lineage of Membracoidea, which otherwise include the families Aetalionidae (aetalionid treehoppers), Membracidae (typical treehoppers and thorn bugs), Melizoderidae and the strange Myerslopiidae . [4] [5] [6]

Subfamilies
The leafhoppers are divided into a high number (about 40) of subfamilies , which are listed here alphabetically, as too little is known about the family's internal phylogeny . Some notable genera and species are also listed.

See also
